HAWAII HISTORY
Nationa l Survey of
Histori c Site s an d Building s

The National Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings
Theme XXI
Politica l and Military Affairs, 1865-1910
Specia l Stud y
HAWAI I HISTOR Y
1778 - 19lO
1962
United States Department of the Interior
Stewart L* Udell, Secretary
National Park Service
Conrad L« Wirth, Director
CONTENT S
page
Preface ........ . i
Acknowledgments ..... . iv
A Summary of the Theme - Part I
I The Discovery of the Islands, 1778 1
II The Hawaiian Kingdom, 1778-1819 . 9
III The Missionary Era, 1820-1854 18
IV Sugar, Whaling, and Cattle-Raising,I855-1893 33
V Threats of Foreign Annexation, I778-I887 51
VI The Hawaiian Republic and Annexation, 18*75-1898 65
VII The Territory of Hawaii, I898-I9IO 82
VIII Literature, Painting, and Sculpture. 98
Suggested Reading ... . .109
Survey of Sites and Buildings - Part IT
General Discussion . • 115
Sites of Exceptional Value 121
1. Cook Landing Site 121
2. Puukohola Heiau . 125
3. Kamakahonu (Residence of Kamehameha I,
and Ahuena Heiau) •••• . 128
4. Russian Fort Near Waimea 132
5. kawaiahao Church I36
6. -^Phe Three Mission Houses, Honolulu .......... . lhi
7. Uhaina 147
8. Old Sugar MiU 159
9* Iolani Palace 163
10. Pearl Harbor Naval Base. . I67
Areas in the National Park System Related
to Theme-.lCity of Refuge N.H.P I7I
2. Hawaii Volcanoes National Park 172
3. Haleakala National Park 173
Other Sites Considered . , 174
A. Island of Hawaii
1. Cook Monument 174
2. Hikiau Heiau . 174
3. Hulihee Palace 175
4. Site of KapiolanUsDefiance of Pele (Halamaumau). . . . 176
5. Kuamo'c Battlefield I76
6. Mokuaikaua Church 177
7. Parker Ranch 177
-a-
Other Sites Considered (Continued)
B. Island of Kauai
®. Gullck—Howell House . . . 179
9» Waioli Mission . 179
C. Island of Maul
10. Alexander Home ........ . l80
11. Bailey Home and Wailuku Female Seminary l8l
12. Lahainaluna Technical High School 182
D. Island of Ms-lokai
13. Kalawao Peninsula (Hansen's Disease Settlement). . . , 184
14. Sandalwood Pit I85
E. Island of Oahu
15. Alliolani Hale (or Judiciary Building 185
16. American Protestant Mission School 187
17* Hanaial<amalama (Queen Emma's Summer Home). , 187
18. Nuuanu Pali (Cliff) 188
19. Our Lady of Peace Cathedral 189
20. Thomas Square 190
Sites Also Noted
A # Island of Hawaii
1. Bond House . . . 191
2. Davie Douglas Memorial * 191
3* Kookena 191
4. John Young HomeSite. 191
5. Kaawaloa 191
6. Kalahikiola Church (The Great Stone Church). . . . 192
7- Komefaameha Water Tunnel 192
8. Kamelameha Ill's Birthplace (Lokomaikai) 192
9. Lyman House Immortal Museum. 193
10. Mark Twain Tree •. 193
11. Mokuolai Battlefield (Ke'ei Battlefield) 193
12. Wapoopoo Church 193
13. Old Sugar Mill at Waiohinu 193
14. Puako Church 193
15* Panaluu 193
16. St. Michael's Catholic Church 193
17. Thurston House 194
18 Wahaula Heiau 194
B. Island of Kauai
19. Church of Koloa (White Church) 194
20. Prince Kuhio's Birthplace 194
- h -
Fage
B* Island of Kauai **&*
19. Church of Koloa (White Church) 194
20. Prince Kuhio's Birthplace 194
21. Russian Port near Hanalei. 195
22. St. Raphael's Church (or Mission) 195
23. Wailua Coconut Grove .... . , . I95
24. Waimea Church (Stone Church) 195
C. Island of Maui
25. Huialoha Church 196
26. Iao Valley (Kepaniwai Battlefield) 196
27. Kaahumanu Church 196
28. Kaahumanu's Birthplace 196
29. Keanae Congregational Church ..... . 196
30. Makena 196
3 1. Olowalu Ending 197
32. Wananalua Church 197
D. Island of Ms-lokai
33* Kaluoolsa Congregational Church. 197
34. Kamehameha V's Coconut Grove ........... . 197
35- Pakuhiwa (Kawela) Battlefield 197
E. Island of Oahu
36. Court House (Old Parliament House) 198
37. Diamond Head (Leahi) ' . , . 198
38. First Artesian Well . 198
39. Iolani Barracks .... . 198
40. Kamehameha Ill's Summer Palace (KaniaKapupu ... . 199
1*1. Kualoa Sugar Mill. 199
42. Punahou School 199
43. Robert Louis Stevenson's Grass House 199
44. Royal Miusoleum • 199
4$. St. Andrew's Episcopal Cathedral 200
46. Washington Place 200
Appendix I - Criteria for Classification »•••'•• • 20l
MAP S
1. Hawaiian Islands ...**•••• • . . . . . Frontispiece
Following Page
2, Historic Sites in the Hawaiian Islands 201
-c-
I
I
IIXDSTRAxIOHS
Following Page
Cover - Coat of Arms, Kingdom of Hawaii, Courtesy Bishop Miseum
1. Cook Landing Site, Mouth of Waimea River, 196*2 ....#••• • 1
2. H.M.S. Resolution and Discovery, 1779 > Cook Landing Site . , . • 3
3. Puukohola Heiau, Island of Hawaii, 1819 . 11
k. Ahuena Heiau, Island of Hawaii, 1816-17 13
5. Site of Kapiolani Defiance of Pele, 1962 22
6. Town of Lahaina, 1962 . . 27
7. Plan of Russian Fort Wear Waimea, 1885 53
8. Cook landing Site « 123
9. Puuisohola Heiau, 1962 126
10. Kamakahonu fKamehameha I's Residence). . 128
11. Kamakahonu (Ruins of Ahuena Heiau) ........ . 130
12. Ruins of Russian Fort near waimea, 1958 13^
13. Kawaiahao Church, Honolulu 138
1^. American Protestant Mission School, Honolulu 138
15. Three Mission Houses, Honolulu ......... . 142
16. The Three MLssion Houses (Chamberlain House) ......... . ikk
17* Lahaina - Baldwin House .•........*......,. • 151
18. Lahaina - Old Spring House 152
19. Lahaina - Custom House and Court House 153
20. Lahaina - Cell Block of Old Prison 153
21. Lahaina - Hale Aloha Church 155
22. Lahaina - U. S. Marine Hospital f 156
23. Lahaina - Pioneer Hotel 157
2k. Old Sugar Mill, Koloa, Kauai 162
25. Iolani Palace 165
26. Pearl Harbor Waval Base Memorial • 168
27. Cook Monument and Hikiau Heiau 173
28. Hulihee Palace 175
29. Makuaikaua Church, Kailua 176
30. Gulick - Rowell House 178
31. Waioli Mission Meeting House 179
32. Alexander Home l80
33* Bailey House and Wailuku Female Seminary ........... . l8l
3k. Hale Ra'i or Printing House, Iahainaluna 182
35. Sandalwood Pit, Island of Mblokai iQk
36. Aliiolani Hale, or Judiciary Bldg, Honolulu 185
37. Hanalakamalama (Queen Emma's Summer Home) 187
38. Wuuanu Pali (cliffs).^ 189
39. Our Lady of Peace Ca^edral, Honolulu 190
-d-
P r e f a c e
The National Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings
is a resumption of the Historic Sites Survey "begun in 1937,
under the authority of the Historic Sites Act of 1935. During
World War II, and the emergency following, it was necessary to
suspend these studies. The Survey has novr been resumed as part
of the National Park Service MISSION 6*6 Program.
The purpose of the Survey, as outlined in the Historic
Sites Act, is to "make a survey of historic and archeologic
sites, buildings, and objects for the purpose of determining
which possess exceptional value as commemorating or illustrating the history of the United States." In carrying out this
basic directive, each site and builddng considered in the Survey
is evaluated in terms of the Criteria for Classification, which
are listed in the appendix of this report.
When completed the Survey will make recommendations
to the Director of the National Park Service and the Secretary
of the Interior as to the sites of "exceptional value." This
will assist the National Park Service in preparing the National
Recreation Plan, including sites which may be administered by
the National Park Service to fill in gaps in the historical and
archeological representation within the National Park System.
It will also recommend and encourage programs of historical and
archeological preservation being carried out by state and local
agencies.
i
This study was prepared by Dr. John A. Hussey,
Regional Historian, Region Four Office, San Francisco.
Assistance in guiding the report through to publication
was provided by Charles W. Snell, Historian, also of the
Region Four Office.
After completion, the study was presented to the Consulting Committee for the National Survey of Historic Sites and
Buildings. The Committee consists of Dr. Vfeldo G. Leland, Director of the American Council of Learned Societies; Dr. S* K»
Stevens, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission; Dr. Louis B. Wright, Folger-Shakespearean
Library; Mr. Earl H. Reed, American Institute of Architects;
Dr. Richard H. Rowland, Head Curator, Civil History, Smithsonian
Institution; Mr. Eric Gugler, American Scenic and Historical
Preservation Society; Dr. J, 0. Brew, Committee for the Recovery
of Archeological Remains; Mr. Frederick Johnson, Robert S. Peabody
Foundation for American Archeology; Mr, Robert Garvey, Jr., Executive Director of the National Trust for Historic Preservation; and
Dr. Ralph H. Gabriel, Sterling Professor of History Emeritus, Yale
University, and Professor of American Studies> American University.
ii
The over-all Survey, as well as the theme study
which follows, is under the general direction of John 0.
Littleton, Chief, National Survey of Historic Sites and
Buildings, who works under the general supervision of
Herbert E. Kahler, Chief, Division of History and Archeology, of the National Park Service.
Conrad L. Wirth
Director
iii
ACIQ^OWLBDGEMEaSTS
The work of the National Survey profits from the experience
and knowledge of a considerable number of persons and organizations. Assistance from the foUoving people in Hawaii is gratefully aclaiowledged:
Mr. Russell A. Apple, Superintendent, City of Refuge National
Historical Park; Mrs. Dorothy B, Barrere, Associate in Hawaiian
Culture, Bernice P. Bishop Museum; Miss Agnes C. Conrad, Archivist,
State Archives, Honolulu; Mr. Richard C. Dunlap, Director, Division
of State Parks; Mr. Albert Duval, District Forester, Island of ICauai,
State Division of Forestry; Dr. Kenneth P. Emory, Chairman Department
of Anthropology, Bernice P. Bishop Museum; Mr. Robert Gahran, Adult
Librarian, Kauai Public Library, Lihui; Commander H. J. Gimpel,
Public Information Officer, Pearl Harbor; Mrs, Thelma H. Hadley,
Librarian, Lihui, Kauai; Hawaii Visitors Bureau, Honolulu; Chief Park
Naturalist Ik right Hamilton and the naturalist staff, Hawaii Volcanoes
National Park; Mr. Fred T. Johnston, Superintendent, Hawaii Volcanoes
National Park; Mr. Frank P. I/ymbardi, Director, State Planning Office;
Mrs. Josephine K. liedeiros, Hana, Island of Maui; Mr. Edward K.Robinson,
Branch Manager, First National Bank of Hawaii, VJaimea, ICauai; Mrs. Roy
H. Savage, President, Maui Historical Society; Mr. Herbert C. Shipman,
Hilo; Mr. Robert 0. Thompson, Honolulu; Miss Margaret Titcomb, Librarian, Bernice P. Bishop Museum.
The cover was prepared by the Western Museum Laboratory,
National Park Service, San Francisco; and the mapsby the Division
of Recreation Resource Planning, Region Four Office, San Francisco.
iv
Chapter I
"An Island Made Its Appearance"
Per days there had been signs of land in the vast sea where maps
showed no land to be* Birds and turtles were seen with tantalizing
frequency* The crews of the British exploring vessels Resolution
and Discovery, ploughing their way under the command of Captain
James Cook from the Society Islands toward the Northwest Coast of
America, sharply watched the empty expanse ahead* Then, noted one
log of the voyage, at dawn on January 18, 1778, "an island made
its appearance."
The landfall later proved to be the purple-green mountains of
Oahu, Soon a second island was sighted to the northward, and
toward it, because of the prevailing winds, the vessels shaped
their course, The next day they coasted the eastern shore of this
isle, which was Kauai.
All questions about the new land being inhabited were dispelled
when canoes put out from shore and closely approached the ships.
Captain Cook was delighted to find that the natives spoke a language almost identical with that used in Tahiti, and soon pigs, fish,
and sweet potatoes were being transferred from the canoes in trade
for bits of iron, for which the natives showed a keen desire.
This exchange, said Cook, demonstrated that "they had some notion of
bartering," It also ended, for all time, the independent develops
ment of a Hawaiian culture.
1
Mouth of Waimea River, Kauai, where Captain Cook first landed on the Hawaiian
Islands, 1778.
N. P. S. Photograph, 1961
On January 20 Cook found a suitable anchorage for his ships
Off the village of Waimea, and boats we re soon sent ashore for
fresh water* Cook landed at this hospitable spot, on one occasion
making a short excursion up the valley to observe the houses,
gardens, and temples of the inhabitants. "These people are
scanty in their cloathing," he noted in his journal. Other
members of the crews also had their eyes on the charms of the
Hawaiian women because, despite their commander's strict orders
that there was to be no contact with the females, the sailors
left behind them the gift of venereal disease.
The ships remained only two weeks at Kauai and the neighboring
island of Niihau, arid then they sailed away for the coast of North
America. Cook named his discovery the Sandwich Islands after the
Earl of Sandwich, First Lord of the Admiralty.
After Cook's departure, word of his visit spread throughout
the inhabited islands of the Hawaiian chain. The circumstances
of his coming corresponded roughly with ancient Hawaiian traditions
about the god Lono, and the natives concluded that he was an incarnation of that deity. Thus, when the Resolution and Mscpyerv
returned to the islands during November, 1778, after their visit
to the Northwest Coast, Cook was everywhere accorded the honors of
a god, as, indeed, had been the case during his first visit. The
vessels skirted Maui and finally, during January, 1779, came to
James Cook, The Explorations of Captain James Cook in the
Pacific as Told by Selections of His Own Journals, 1766-1779^
editedby A. Grenrell Price (Melbourne, Australia, 1956), 222.
2
anchor at Kealakekua Bay on the Kona Coast of Hawaii.
The purpose of this second visit was to explore the islands
and to refit the ships for another voyage to northern latitudes.
With the friendly cooperation of the natives, the vessels were
ready for sea again in less than three weeks. By that time the
Hawaiians were somewhat appalled at the enormous amount of provisions
required by the British, and they apparently were relieved when the
ships sailed northward up the Kona Coast, But a sudden storm damaged
^^e He solution:* and both vessels returned to Kealakekua Bay, The
Hawaiians were still hospitable, but there was increasing thievery
of objects from the ships.
Finally, the Discovery's cutter was stolen, and on February lk9
1J19, Captain Cook went ashore to take the native king hostage for
its return, A sharp, brief, and alsmost accidental skirmish resulted.
Cook, "the greatest explorer of his age" and four marines died under
the clubs, stones, daggers, and spears of the Hawaiians, As usual
under such circumstances, the surviving Europeans chastised the
natives in punishment. Parts of Cook*s body were recovered, and
the ships " sailed off, never to return.
Shortly before his death, Cook recorded his judgment that his
discovery of the Hawaiian Islands seemed "in many respects to be
the most important , . , made by Europeans throughout . . . the
Pacific area,"c Although the perspective of time has not sustained
Cook, OJK cit., xiv.
2
Ibid., 215.
3
H.M.S. Resolution and Discovery at Kealakekua Bay, Island of Hawaii, 1779, as drawn by a Cook Expedition artist.
Courtesy Bernicc P. Bishop Museum
this opinion — certainly the change brought to the rest of the
world was relatively minor — there is no doubt that the discovery
was momentous for the Hawaiian Islands. Hitherto, during centuries
of nearly complete isolation, the pattern of Hawaiian social and
cultural life had evolved gradually and primarily from internal
forces. Henceforth, economic and social change was rapid and was
moved primarily by external forces. As one Hawaiian historian
bitterly wrote: "The seeds that he planted here have sprouted,
grown, and become the parents of others that have caused the decrease of the native population."
Cookfs last voyage had another result of great consequence for
Hawaii. On the way home, sailors of his expedition found that
sea otter skins gathered on the Northwest Coast of America brought
temptingly high prices in the markets of China. Merchants and ship
captains saw the possibilities for profits, and in due time, allowing
for the wars then in progress and other difficulties, a brisk trade
grew up between Canton and the American coast. The British were
first in the field, but soon the newly independent Americans discovered the beauties and the fabulous returns of a triangular trade
between Boston, the Northwest, Canton, and back to Boston; and they
eventually obtained a virtual monopoly of the business.
The first vessel known to have visited the islands after Cook
was a small British brig on its way to China with a cargo of furs
in IT85. From that time the Sandwich Islands became known as a
convenient place to break the long trans-Pacific voyage, to obtain
supplies, or to spend the winter when the weather was too boisterous
Samuel M. Kamakau, Ruling Chiefs of Hawaii (Honolulu, 1OJ6I)>3J01I,
k
on the coasts of Oregon and Alaska. As a crewman on a later exploring
expedition noted, "What a happy discovery these islands were' What
would the American fur trade he, without these to winter at and get
every refreshment 7^
In a very few years ships from many different countries, not only
fur traders but exploring vessels and general traders, were flocking
to the sparkling waters of Hawaii and anchoring off a score of
villages, Several unfortunate clashes occurred between the foreigners
and the Hawaiians, but on the whole intercourse between the newcomers
and the natives was friendly and profitable to both. The natives soon
became more sophisticated in their trading and demanded higher prices.
Firearms of all types and ammunition were much desired by the cliiefs
and became an important factor in increasing the slaughter during the
frequent and bitter civil wars. As for the visiting sailors, it must
be admitted that along with the fresh water, sweet potatoes, and pork
of Hawaii they eagerly anticipated the island women. Many early
visitors have testified that nowhere in the Pacific were female
charms so freely offered.
With such temptations before them it was not long before some
of the seafaring visitors deserted their comrades and made new homes
ashore. The first known foreign resident was a roving Irish surgeon,
John Mackay, who settled on the Island of Hawaii in 17BT* During
that same year at least two adventurous Hawaiians, one a woman, joined
.trading ships and sailed away for distant lands, the first of a long
line of Hawaiian seamen who were to roam the world.
Ralph S. Kuykendall and A, Grove Day, Hawaii; A History (New York,
19W), 30.
5
The number of foreigners living in Hawaii grew steadily. By
1819 there probably were about 200 in the islands. Most of them
were runaway sailors, mainly "vagabonds" of the lowest type. Before
long there were even a few escaped prisoners from the Australian
penal colony lurking in the back country. Others — a few — were
men of education; some possessed a good store of practical Imowledge
and common sense; and, in all classes, there were men of character.
The useful men were in much demand by the chiefs as instructors
in war, as advisors, and as managers of estates. Such men were held
in high esteem, and were showered with lands, wives, and privileges.
It was noted, however, that very few of the foreigners, even the
best of them, made any real effort to educate the natives or to teach
them to cope with the intricacies of Western culture. In fact, instances are recorded of Europeans deliberately refusing to instruct
the Hawaiians in the new technology. They were afraid that to do
So would reduce the need for their services and lose them their
favored places.
The foreign residents at first were largely Europeans and
Americans, but by 179^ there were Chinese living at ICealakelcua.
Hawaii's role as a melting pot of races got off to an early start.
But children of mixed blood were only one of the problems which the
foreign contacts brought to Hawaii, problems with which the natives
were ill equipped to cope. In addition to venereal diseases, the
newcomers brought such scourges as smallpox, measles, and whooping
cough. Having developed no immunity to these afflictions and not
knowing how to treat them, the Hawaiians succumbed by the thousands.
6
Most of the foreigners, whether casual visitors or permanent residents,
were a rough lot, who had "hung their consciences on Cape Horn*"
They did not hesitate to debauch the natives for their own pleasure
or profit. In particular, distilled liquor proved irresistable to
the Hawaiians, and accounts of the extent of drunkenness and alcoholism among the natives almost defy belief.
Not all of the new importations were harmful. The introduction
of European domestic animals began with Cook, and by 1803 the
islanders possessed goats, sheep, cattle, and horses. Many new
plants, particularly fruits and vegetables, were eagerly adopted
by the Hawaiians, although along with the importations came such
pests as fleas and mosquitoes. Many introductions, useful elsewhere in the world, ran wild in the new environment and became pests.
The balance of rature was quickly upset.
Such items of European manufacture as guns, tools, cloth, and
household utensils made life easier for the natives, who had lived
in a stone-age culture. But trade with the foreigners was, at
best, upsetting to the old ways of life. Settlements shifted from
traditional locations to the harbors convenient for shipping. The
common people were forced to produce not only for themselves but
also for the traders. This increased burden became particularly
heavy after about 1812 when the sandalwood trade — started as early
as 1790 — began to emerge as a major industry. The trade soon became a royal monopoly and was therefore somewhat controlled, tut
nevertheless thousands of Hawaii cms were sent to the mountains to
cut the fragrant trees for the mar Icet in China, forcing neglect of
the usual domestic economy,
7
Although visitors still continued to report that the Hawaiians
were a happy, carefree, generous people, all of these changes had
cumulative and deadly effects. The most obvious was a rapid decline
in population. It is believed that there were 300,000 native Hawaiians
at the time of Cook's discovery. By 1820 there remained only about
135,000; by 1850 there were only about 85,000; and in 1890 the number
had fallen to 40,000.
This drop in population was accompanied by what has been termed
"a mass psychological deterioration," The natives were overwhelmed
by the new culture and came to distrust their old way of life. An
apathy, often extending even to loss of the desire to live, took
hold of large groups of the people, further lessening the chances of
adapting to the new ways. Scepticism was everyv/here, paving the way
for the end of the old social order. Truly, the first Hawaiian who
accepted one of Captain Cook's trinkets in 1778 had opened a Pandora's
Box of horrors for his people.
Gerrit P. Judd IV, Hawaii: An Informal History (New York,
1961), 38.
8
CHAPTER II
"Philosophers are Most Mistaken"
• • - " ••.. ,#
From time immemorial the Hswaiians had lived under a political
organization which approached feudalism. There were no tribes, but
there were kings and chiefs who controlled the land and parcelled it
out to their followers. Many chiefs were eligible by high blood
lines to be rulers of large districts, of entire island's, or even
of several islands; and thus those of ambition and ability
were free to attempt enlargement of their domains through agreements
or force. There was a constant shifting of loyalties between chiefs
and kings; and kingdoms were perpetually expanding and then being
broken up.
The situation was one which led to frequent wars, often marked
by large expeditions of conquest, both by land and sea. This warfare,
together with such dangerous sports as sledding and high diving,
often resulted in 6hort careers for the alii or chiefs, and it
imposed a cruel burden on the commoners, who had to follow their
chief to battle to retain their plots of land. Hawaiian wars were
not mere formalities, ending after a few token deaths. They were
serious and bloody affairs in which the losers were frequently annihilated to the last man. Prisoners almost invariably were killed, and
conquered lands were ravaged, with slaughter of noncombatants-* — men,
women, and even children.
9
When Cook revealed the islands to the Western world in 1779-
1?79> they were divided into four kingdoms: Hawaii and a part of
Maui; Maui and its dependent islands; Oahu; and Kauai and Niihau.
As far as the future of the Hawaiian group was concerned, the most
important of these was Hawaii, under the rule of a leading chief
named Kalaniopuu, Even in Cook's day, while Kalaniopuu, though old,
was at the height of his power, the king's nephew, a strapping young
chief from Kohala named Karaehameha, was demonstrating leadership
in both peace and war.
In 17B2 Kalaniopuu died, and his eldest son, Kiwalao, succeeded
him as ruler of all Hawaii. But Kiwalao was under the domination
of the chiefs of Hilo, and when the customary land redistribution
was made by the new king, the Hilo alii received the lion's share.
Five dissatisfied alii-.of the Kona district, with Karaehameha as their
leader, had banded together to protect their interests, and they
were soon at war with Kiwalao. The king was defeated and killed on
the field at Mokuohai. Hawaiian tradition says that Karaehameha at
once realized that this victory "was but the beginning of an empire."
For the time being, however, the ambitious Karaehameha had to be
content with the districts of Kohala, Kona, and Hamakua, which together formed one of the three kingdoms into which the island of
Hawaii was next divided. Then followed a decade of intermittent
civil war during which Karaehameha fought undecisively with the
rulers of the other two kingdoms on the island and harassed Maui
and Oahu. In the spring of 1790 ue launched a major campaign of
1
Kamakau, Ruling Chiefs of Hawaiix 123,
10
conquest which began on Maui. His forces pushed the Maui defenders
into the gorge of Iao behind Vfeiluku, and so great was the slaughter
that the bodies of the dead blocked the stream. After this victory,
he pushed on to Lana.t and Molokai. Meanwhile, his chief rival on
Hawaii, Keoua, who war- Kamehameha's cousin and king of Kau and part
of Puna, took advantage of the The Lonely One's absence to invade
Kohala. Kamehameha wan forced to forego his dreams of empire for
the time being and returned to defend his lands on Hawaii,
Kamehameha had be on told by a famous soothsayer of Kauai that if
he wished to rule all the Island of Hawaii he must erect a new
heiau, or temple, to the war god at Puukohola, near Kawaihae.
This task was now undertaken at a vast expense of labor and a liberal
sacrifice of human offerings. Then, by one of those strange turns of
Hawaiian politics which are difficult to understand, Keoua was persuaded to go to Kawaihae to make peace with his cousin. As he
stepped ashore from his canoe one day in the summer of XJ9X he was
basely murdered by one of Kamehameha' chiefs, and his body was
carried up the hill to the new heiau* "In the smoke from the sacrificial altar vanished all opposition to the control by Kamehameha of
the Big Island."1
Kamehameha now demonstrated the wisdom and character which were
his true strengths. For the next few years he avoided war and devoted his efforts to organizing his government and building up the
resources of his kingdom. Captain George Vancouver, who had met
Kamehameha during Cook's voyage, visited the islands again during
1
Kuykendall and Day, Hawaii: A History, 25.
11
Puukohola Heiau. near Kawaihae, Island of Hawaii, scene of the sacrifice of Keoua, as viewed in 1819 by a member of the de
Freycinet Expedition, 1819. __, D _ _,, „
' Courtesy Bernice P. Bishop Museum
1792, 1793, and 179k. He found the king a changed man, the "stem
ferocity" of his younger days softened and modified by "great
generosity, and goodness of disposition." Like many other chiefs,
Kamehameha had early recognized that Western technology could be
useful in his rise to power. He vigorously acquired firearms, ammunition, and even ships to assist him in his campaigns, and he recruited
foreigners to operate the new weapons.
Two of these advisors were of particular importance. Kamehameha
had forcibly detained Isaac Cox and John Young from American vessels
during 1790. Through kindly treatment he won their loyalty, and
they both became influential chiefs. They were relatively uneducated,
but they were men of natural ability and good character and exercised
a beneficial effect upon the king. But Kamehameha did not let the
foreigners rule him. He remained the master and they the servants.
By 179^ "the rulers of Maui and Oahu were fighting each other,
thus weakening even the victor. Kamehameha sensed that the moment had
come to continue his bid for suprerae power. Quickly overrunning Maui,
he landed a large and well equipped force at Waikiki on Oahu during
the spring or summer of 1795« The Oahu defenders chose to make their
final stand in the Nuuanu Valley behind Honolulu. They could not resist the artillery of the invaders and gave way, many being ruthlessly
driven over the cliff, Nuuanu Pali, at the head of the valley.
This victory in 1795 marks the traditional ascension of Kamehameha
to rule over all the islands. Actually, he still did not control
Kauai and Niihau; and a combination of circumstances prevented him
Ralph S. Kuykendall, The Hawaiian Kingdom . . . I778-I85H
(Honolulu, 1957), 39.
12
from invading those isles, though he several times organized fleets
for the purpose* Foreigners, anxious to a/old interruption of trade,
were instrumental in arranging a settlement* In 1810 Kaumualii, the
king of Kauai, recognized Kamehameha as his ruler, and Hawaii was at
last unified into a single kingdom*
The rise of Kamehameha during the critical period of initial con*
tact with Western civilization is one of the outstanding events of
Hawaiian history. His skill in dealing with the foreigners and
the firmness with which he organized hiB rule over all the islands undoubtedly were instrumental in preventing Hawaii from following so
many other Pacific islands into European empires. The momentum gained
during his reign helped carry his kingdom through a century of independence.
The years following 1795 were ones of peace. Kamehameha placed
strong governors over the Islands and devoted much of his time to repairing the frightful damage caused by the long c%vil wars. One of
his most famous law3, that of the "splintered paddle," a name recalling an incident of cruelty on his own part during a raid on
Puna, decreed: "Let the aged, men and women, and little children
lie down in safety in the road." And, of necessity, he skillfully
controlled his subordinate chiefs so that none of them could raise
an insurrection* Such measures tended to create a "sort of national
feeling" which had hitherto been lacking in Hawaiian life.
The death of Kamenameha, the Great occured at Kailua, on the Kona
Coast of Hawaii, on May 8, 1819. By his own stern decree, no human
lives were sacrificed at his passing* This departure from tradition
13
Aluiena Ileiau
Louis Choris,
adjoining Kamehameha the the Great's last home at Kailua, Island of Hawaii, as sketched by
1816-1817 . Courtesy Bcrnicc P. Bishop Museum
was sure evidence tha t the old order was crumbling. Yet, with this
exception, Kamehameha had been a firm upholder of the old feudal
autocracy, of the ancient gods, and of the kapu system with al l
i ts crueltie s and inequities.
Despite the king's support, the Hawaiian religion had been losing
i ts strength for some time, undoubtedly the contacts with foreigners
were chiefly responsible, although there is evidence tha t many
Hawaiians were sickened by the insatiabl e demand for sacrificia l
victims and were tire d of the arbitrary oppression by priests and
chiefs which the system made possible. When foreigners were seen to
violate the taboos with impunity, doubts were naturally aroused in
the minds of the natives. And the foreigners did not hesitat e to
point out their belief tha t their own God, their own interpretation
of natural phenomena, and their own social concepts were superior,
and to deplore the kapu restrictions. " I say damn such laws,"
wrote a sailor on H.M.S. Bacoon when he learned tha t taboos prevented
women from eating with men and imposed other limitations and obligations upon their mating activities.
The passing of lOamehameha bxongit the matter, of'religion to a head.
Th$ new king, son of Kamehameha the Great, was Ltholiho, an amiable
young man of "some shrewdness" but no outstanding strength of character. Almost immediately upon his accession, several of his most
important advisors, including his own mother, Keopuolani; and his coruler, his father's favorite queen, Kaahumanu, urged him to end the
kapus. He finally agreed, and early in November, l8l9, he symbolically
broke the most sacred taboos by eating in public with the women of his
The Voyage of the "Racoon," edited by John A. Hussey (San Francisco,
1958)71%
Ik
court. Immediately thereafter he ordered the destruction of all
temples and Idols throughout the islands*
The end of the lapus was generally received with rejoicing by
the people, but many, particularly the priests and chiefs, would not
agree to the complete destruction of their ancient gods and religious
system* The conservative element rallied at Kealakekua Bay under
a chief named Keloiaokalani, who assumed the position of high priest
and chief defender of the old gods. The rebel forces met the king's
army during December, 1819, at Kuamo,o, on the coast of Kona, and
were decisively defeated. The ancient gods were indeed dead. And,
equally important, the Hawaiian kingdom proved that it could hold
together despite the removal of Kamehameha's founding hand.
The effects of Liholiho's decree can scarcely be over-estimated.
The two or three decades following the end of the kapu system constituted a period of confusion and difficulty for the Hawaiians. Ageold patterns of domestic life, based on the sanctity of chiefs, on
seniority, and on the separation of men and women for eating, for
serious labor, and for other occasions, were suananly disrupted.
"Neither man, woman nor child any longer knew order, status or
authority in the household." It was years before a new pattern of
life, based upon (Erristian mores, was firmly established*
The chiefs were stripped of their god-like status, but they still
owned and controlled the land* The commoners still looked to them
for leadership and guidance, but the chiefs had less reason to be
concerned in the welfare of their people. With the end of the power
1
E. S. Craighill Handy and Mary Kawena Pukui, The Polynesian Family
System in Ka'u, Hawaii (Wellington, N.Z., 1958), 233-235.
15
struggles between chieftains, the alii no longer needed to exercise
restraint in order to keep retinues of loyal warriors* Thus, paradoxically, peace brought increased suffering to the commoners.
Even at the height of the old system, the chiefs often treated
the common people with great arrogance and cruelty* One early foreign
visitor was horrified to see the manner in which one petty chief
ran down the canoes of commoners who were in his way and how he maimed
with stones those who were tardy in obeying his commands. "Philosophers
are most mistaken who build systems of natural liberty," the observer
concluded* "Rousseau's savages exist nowhere but in his writings."
The situation was made worse by another action of Liholiho. The
sandalwood trade, hitherto a royal prerogative, was opened to a number
of the chiefs. With all the products of the Western world and the
Orient suddenly brought within their economic reach, these alii vent
on a mad buying spree* Suddenly pate de foie gras and the most expensive champagnes were scarcely good enough for chiefs who had hitherto
been perfectly content with baked dbg and live fish. Grass-covered
huts blossomed with all sorts of European furniture and "foreign
mechanics" whose uses were ill understood by the Hawaiians. "Huge
state-beds to look at, and piles of fine cool mats to sleep upon,"
2
epitomized the situation in the eyes of one observer.
Theodore Morgan, Hawaii, A Century of Economic Change (Cambridge,
Mass., I9A8), 9.
2 ,
Francis Steegmuller, The Two Lives cf James Jackson Jarves (New
Haven, 1951), 19«
16
To pay the resulting debts, more and more commoners were forced
into the mountains to log sandalwood. As men, women, and cMldren
were driven to this generally unhealthful task, the ordinary economy
was neglected. In many areas planting and fishing practically ceased.
The combination of forced labor and famine contributed greatly to
the decline in the Hawaiian population.
Clearly, despite their strong central government, the Hawaiians
were destroying themselves, and they were being destroyed by outside
influence. The foreigners already in the islands, even those of
the caliber of John Young, were doing little to stop the decline.
If enything of the Hawaiian people and culture was to survive, a
new force was required.
17
Chapter III
"Open Your Hearts Wide"
The use of the Hawaiian islands as a supply station for the China
and Northwest trades had far-reaching results. One was making the
islands known to the rest of the world. Many native Havaiians, superb
sailors and untiring workers, joined the crews of European and
American ships and traveled to distant lands.
By l8l6 there were several Hawaiian youths in New England. The
best known of them, Henry Qpukahaia, so the* story goes, was found one
morning in 1809 by a New Haven divinity graduate on the steps of a
building on the Yale campus, weeping because he yearned for a Christian
education. A group of students befriended him, and he was later enrolled at a mission training school and became a convert. Death prevented his return to his native land to preach the Gospel, but the
well publicized story of his frustrated ambition was widely circulated
in missionary circles.
Through such islanders and the reports of traders, the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, an interdenonri.national
body chiefly supported by the Presbyterian and Congregational Churches,
became interested in the Hawaiian Islands. The first band of missionaries, a group of seventeen persons under the guidance of the Reverend
Hiram Bingham and the Reverend Asa Thurston, sailed from Boston on
the brig Thaddeus on October 23 > 1&19. On April h of the next year
these "Hawaiian PUlgrims" went ashore at Kailua on the Island of Hawaii
and requested Liholiho's permission to live in the country and bring
Christianity to its people.
18
After some hesitation, perhaps occasioned by the national jealousies of his English and French advisors, the king gave his consent
for a year's trial* The missionaries then divided. The main party
went on to Honolulu, but some remained at Kailua and, later, two sailed
to Kauai. On April 23, 1820, the first Christian sermon in the islands
was preached at Honolulu by the Reverend Hiram Bingham. His text was
"Fear not, for I bring you glad tidings of great joy."
The missionaries had been surprised and pleased to learn upon
their arrival that the old native religion of nature worship had been
abandoned. Indeed, they regarded the circumstance as nothing short of
miraculous. The spiritual upheaval made the new soil more fertile
than they had dreamed possible, and they set to work with a will to
cultivate it.
Liholiho insisted that the missionaries confine their first efforts
to tie chiefs, who would determine: if the new teachings were suitable
for the general populace. There have been observers unkind enough,
however, to attribute the king's concern for the commoners to the
need to keep them chopping sandalwood. At any rate, the restriction
coincided with the inclination of the missionaries, who believed that
the conversion of the nobility would lead to the more rapid proselyting of the lower classes.
A first step in spreading the Gospel was for the missionaries to
learn Hawaiian and to communicate with the natives through"'both the
spoken and written word. This objective required them to reduce the
Hawaiian language, hitherto only a spoken tongue, to writing and to
teach the natives to read and write. An alphabet for transcribing
19
Hawaiian was devised, and on January 7, 1822, the first page of a
small spelling book in the native tongue was printed on the mission
press in Honolulu. From that time a flood of works in Hawaiian —
textbooks, translations of the Bible, religious tracts, and many
other types of books -- poured from the press at Honolulu and from
another established at Lahainaluna on Maui in 1834. By 1830 nearly
400,000 copies of 28 different books and tracts had been produced.
Hand in hand with this work went the establishment of schools.
The teaching program was launched immediately after the arrival of
the missionaries. Mrs. Bingham guided the first instruction, and
after a few months there were about 100 pupils, mostly adults of
the chiefly class, enrolled in several mission schools. Instruction
was slow until the newcomers learned Hawaiian; then it went ahead
with a rush. During 1824 the regent, Queen ICaahumanu, authorized
the schools to be opened to all classes of the population, and during
that year an attendance of about 2,000 was reported.
The Hawaiians embraced the new learning with enthusiasm. They
were eager to acquire knowledge of the culture from the outer world.
Many of the first pupils became teachers. By the fall of I83I about
52,000 natives, or about 40 per cent of the population, attended
1,100 schools scattered throughout the islands. A year or two later
the fad for learning slackened, and school attendance dropped off
to a more realistic level. Yet, by 1830 it was estimated that more
than half of the adult population could read, and by 1846 another
estimate, perhaps a bit optimistic, stated that 80 per cent of the
people could read and write. The wife of one missionary claimed that
20
in Hawaii the proportion of natives who could read and write was
"greater than in any other country in the world except Scotland
and Hew England,"
This missionary achievement is even more impressive when the
character of the curriculum is examined. The earliest schools
taught only reading and spelling, but gradually arithmetic, composition, geography, "moral sciences," and other subjects were added.
Technical subjects were also taught at a number of schools, "Industrial training" was part of the instruction given at the new school
for natives established at Lahainaluna in 1831, and several "female
seminaries" instructed girls in household duties.
The missionaries and their immediate descendants believed that
education would result in better Christians and better citizens, and
thus they promoted schooling for all classes of the population. Upon
their advice public school laws were passed in 1840 which made attendance compulsory through the age of fourteen; and schools were
later placed upon a tax-supported basis. This early and continued
insistence upon universal education was in later years a significant
factor in the social, economic, and political development of the
islands. But the missionaries sent their own children to separate
schools to keep them from being contaminated by the "lewdness" of
the natives, a policy which also had important results in the development of Hawaii.
The new "Pilgrims" were also remarkably successful in converting
the Hawaiians to Christianity. As was the case with education, the
work of spreading the new faith went slowly at fir6t and was carried
21
on principally among the chiefs. There was an emotional quality
about Christianity which helped fill the void left by the abolition
of the old nature worship; and debauchery among the natives had progressed so far that many alii ''rather welcomed" the missionaries and
their novel ethical concepts,, Key milestones were passed when the
queen mother, Keopuolani, and the co-ruler, Itaahumanu, were converted;
and the action of another high chiefess, Kapiolani, in publicly defying the volcano goddess Pele helped weaken the lingering belief
in the old gods.
Soon the new religion became the rage among the natives of all
classes. They flocked by the thousands to worship, perhaps missing
the finer points of doctrine but highly enjoying the preaching and
singing. Recognizing that the conversions were in many cases only
skindeep, the missionaries for a while followed a conservative policy
in ackoitting church members; and there were periods, as during the mid18301 s, when native interest waned. But progress was nevertheless
substantial. Reinforced by new companies from Boston, the missionaries established churches in all parts of the islands, A "Great
Awakening" from about 1837 to l84l swept the natives into the new
religion on a mass-production basis. One exuberant preacher on the
Big Island admitted ^^kk new members in a single year, anointing
the converts with drops from a vhiskbroom dipped in water. By lQhk
there were 25 independent native churches, and more than one-fifth
of the entire population was composed of church members. The
Henry.T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands (Hew York, I856),
287-288.
Site of Kapiolani's Defiance of Pele. Halemaumau Fire Pit. Kilauea Crater, in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.
N. P. S. Pholograpli, 1962
conclusion is inescapable that the missionary message, though perhaps not fully comprehended, eventually gave the Hawaiians a new body
of doctrine around which they could orient themselves and helped
check disintegration of native morale.
The missionaries did not confine their efforts to spreading the
Gospel and to education. Their aim from the very beginning was to
raise the entire Hawaiian population "to an elevated state of Christian
civilization." Their instructions from the American Board reveal the
breadth of the missionary purpose. "Your views are not to be limited
to a low or a narrow scale/1 they were told; "but you are to open your
hearts wide, and set your mark high. You are to aim at nothing short
Of covering those islands with fruitful fields and pleasant dwellings.,
and schools and churches."
Thus, the missionaries quickly set about making Hawaii as much
like New England as possible. They were particularly shocked by the
free and easy native morals, and more than one missionary wife turned
her head in shame from the nudity visible on every hand. Their efforts
were at first directed toward trying to annihilate the native culture
because they considered it part of the "besotted idolatry" they were
hoping to replace. They imposed modesty of dress upon the churchgoers. The ancient dances, games, and festivals were outlawed. The
"Cold V/ater Army" launched a war on liquor; even smoking was declared
a sin; and Sundays were devoted strictly to prayer. "The poor native,"
said one writer, "was to labor to attain to the sanctity of men and
2
women who rarely smiled and dared not joke.
1
Judd, Hawaii, kl*
2
Steegmuller, The Two Lives of James Jackson Jarves TQ.
23
At least one preacher,, however, had the grace to feel remorse
when the "Pilgrims" placed a ban upon the wearing of flower leis
by churchgoers. "It is a pity a custom so innocent in itself should
ever have to be discouhtinenced," he admitted, but he found the prohibition necessary because some of the flock used leis for "vanity" and
for "meretricious allurement and display,"
Such radical social changes and strict regimentation were not
accepted without some protest and much backsliding. Yet so great was
the interest in the new religion that the common people quite generally
gave up their old ways and sustained their chiefs in their spread of
the new ideas. Externally, at least, the reform was almost complete,
though underneath the unquenchable Hawaiian love of life remained.
"Me missionary here," the natives would say, pointing to the head;
2
"no missionary here," they added, designating the rest of the body.
So great was the influence of the missionaries, in fact, that they
often replaced the chiefs in commanding the loyalty of the commoners.
Great crowds of natives worked for years to build the substantial stone
churches which still grace the islands, and the people freely gave
their labor to support their preachers. The missionaries became the
advisors of the Hawaiians, helping them to adjust to the new technology,
improving their lot with medicine, hospitals, and by instruction in
trades and agriculture. While contributing to the disintegration of
the native culture by accelerating the rate of social change, they
at the same time made possible the rescue of what was left by shaping
the dying way of life to the Western mold.
Cheever, op_. cit., 198.
2
Steegmuller, op. cit., 23.
2k
Since the missionaries did not distinguish religious faith from
other values or customs, it was only natural that they soon began to
participate in political affairs. Their view of government was decidedly theocratic. The Rev. Hiram Bingham once said that the state
"ought to be, and in an important sense is, a religious institution,"
In their general attack on the native culture, the "Pilgrims" did not
at once challenge the authority of the king and high chiefs. Rather,
they encouraged the rulers to feel secure in their authority and to
lean upon the foreigners for advice, So influential did the missionaries become that for two decades the Hawaiian government was in essence
a theocracy.
Toward the end of 1823 King Liholiho, who had assumed the name of
Kamehameha II, departed for a visit to Great Britain. Kaahumanu, the
great friend of the missionaires, was left behind as regent; and
through her influence the religious principles taught by the New
Bnglanders began to be written into lav/. In 1824 edicts were issued
against murder, theft, fighting and breaking the Sabbath. Three years
later gambling, rum selling, and sexual immorality, especially aboard
visiting ships, were added to the list of prohibited activities.
Liholiho died of the measles in London during 1824 and was succeeded by his younger brother, Kamehameha III. When the stern, guiding
hand of Kaahumanu was removed by death in 1832, the 'young monarch for
a while threw off missionary restraint and repealed most of the blue
laws • But he was brought back to the straight and narrow path, and the
restrictive laws were not only re-instituted but were made to apply to
Ben Adams, Hawaii, the Aloha State (New York, 1959), 42.
25
foreigners as well as natives. In 1838 the anti-liquor laws were
strengthened; and in iQko the first Hawaiian constitution declared
that'no law shall be enacted which is at variance with the word of the
Lord Jehovah." Hawaii had officially become a Christian state.
From the establishment of the Mngdom by Kamehameha the Great,
there had been no formal organization of the government; and the commoners were completely at the mercy of the alii, with no rights except
that of removing to the lands of another chief. Troubles with foreign
residents convinced the nobles that a more regular form of government
would be desirable. In 1838 they persuaded one of the missionaries,
the Reverend William Richards, to leave the mission and become an
advisor to the king. Constitutional changes followed rapidly. A
code of laws issued in I839, often called the Hawaiian Magna Carta,
conceded certain rights to the people. The constitution of iQko repeated these declarations and created a legislature elected by popular
vote. "For the first time, the common man had a share of political
power."
From this time forward, Hawaii was governed by law and not by
royal whim. The hand of the missionaries in bringing about this signal
achievement is abundantly evident, giving substance to the statement
by one historian that "the single most important • fact about the
internal history of Hawaii /from 1819/ • • • to about l8*K), was the gradual domination of the government in these years by the American
2
missionaries,"
1
Kuykendall and Day, Hawaii, 5^»
2
Judd, op. cit., 49.
26
The influence of the missionaries was not exerted without opposition- By 1820 several foreign mercantile houses had been established
in the islands to supply both the natives and the trading vessels which
plied the Pacific. The sandalwood traffic was then in the last decade
of its importance, but whaling was coming to the fore as the mainstay
of the Hawaiian economy.
The first American whaleships visited the islands in l8l9, and the
discovery of the rich sperm whale grounds off Japan about 1820 soon
brought a host of whalers to Hawaiian ports. During the l84ors and
lS^O's six-sevenths of the world's whaling fleet operated in the Pacific,
and Hawaii was the most convenient place to refit and obtain supplies.
By 1822 about 60 whaling vessels touched at Honolulu, Lahaina, and other
Hawaiian ports; by 1830 the number averaged about 150 annually; and in
1846 there were at least 598 arrivals.
The repairing and supplying of these vessels were a great stimun
lus to Hawaiian agriculture, industry, and trade. The crews swarmed
ashore seeking liquor and women; and their activities in these spheres
also had a great impact upon the island economy as well as upon the
morals and physical well-being of the inhabitants.
As can be imagined, the resident and visiting traders were soon
in conflict with the missionaries, who preached temperance and urged
the natives not to throw away money on Yankee loiicknacks and folderols,
all of which hurt business. And the pleasure-bent seamen from the whalers
and other ships blamed the missionaries for the laws against license,
drunkenness, and other forms of disorder. More than once in Lahaina
and Honolulu the frustrated sailors stormed ashore and rioted against
27
The Town of Lahaina. Maui, viewed from the sea. Although the buildings are recent, the general scene preserves the atmosphere
of the village known to the American winding fleet from the 1820's to the 1860's. N p s phol0 grap h, 1962
the civil authorities and the "Pilgrims," Traders as well as missionaries became advisors to the Hawaiian government, and they won occasional relaxations of the restrictive legislation. But the missionaries steadily gained ground and eventually prevailed.
There was also opposition to the missionaries on political grounds,
particularly by Europeans who believed that the New Englanders were
pushing the islands into the orbit of the United States and by residents who felt that the "Pilgrims" exercised entirely too much influence over the government. Richard Charlton, the British conshl
and an arch foe of American interests, claimed that Kinau, the king's
half sister and prime minister during part of the l830's, was
"entirely governed by the American Missionaries who through her govern
the Islands with unlimited sway,"
Such opposition contributed toward involving the Protestant
missionaries in an unfortunate religious controversy. Anxious to
counterbalance the influence of the New Englanders, certain French and
English nationals encouraged missionaries of other faiths to come to
Hawaii. The first Catholic priests arrived in 1827, but "with the
connivance of the Protestant mission" they were expelled by the Hawaiiangovernment four years later. Native Catholics were persecuted for
"Idolatry" until the protests of foreigners, including the more moderate among the Protestant missionaries, caused the chiefs to desist.
The priests returned several years later, and in 1839 the commander of
a French frigate forced the Hawaiians to accept toleration. From that
time the rigid Puritanism taught by the American Board missionaries
faced competition from the Catholics, Mormons, and representatives
Judd, op. cit,, 5U.
28
of other faiths who, more flexible in their attitudes towards native
customs,, made rapid headway in winning converts.
Despite bitter opposition and periodic setbacks, the New England
missionaries continued to hold a prominent role in the Hawaiian government until the death of Kamehameha III in 1854. Following William
Richards, other missionaries resigned to become important advisors to
the monarchy. Most influential was Dr. Gerrit P. Judd, who served in
a number of high offices between 1842 and I853. In fact, he was
virtually the prime minister and influenced the king in carrying forward
constitutional reforms.
One measure which had the support of both traders and missionaries
was a revision of the land system. From time immemorial, all lands had
belonged to the king, and the nobles and commoners were given only
rights of use. Foreigners were granted lands under the same conditions,
and the uncertainties of tenure caused great dissatisfaction. Merchants
and planters hesitated to improve lands which they did not "own," and
thus the investment of capital was hampered.
The missionaries, on their part, wished to see land made available
to the commoners on a permanent basis. Desiring to encourage "habits
of industry," they envisioned the Hawalians as small farmers on the
New England pattern; but progress was impossible as long as hard work
and thrift only resulted in the confiscation of improvements and savings
by the chiefs. They noted that the old Hawaiians never planted treees
because they would be appropriated by the landlords. "The planting of
trees anywhere," stated one American, "indicates the possession of a
freehold, and the beginning of a prosperous and sound state."
1
Cheever, o£. cit., 69-70.
29
The culmination of a series of steps toward land reform came
with the Great Mahele of iQhS. This action — literally "the divide"..
resulted in a partition of the land among the king, the government,
the nobles, and the commoners. The feudal land system was ended, and
with supplementary legislation passed in 1850, henceforth real property
could be bought and sold by private persons, both native and foreign.
The percentage of land which went to the commoners was relatively small,
but their allotments included much of the kingdom's best agricultural
property.
Unfortunately, the Hawaiians were not used to the concept of
private property, and the Mahele opened the way for the alienation of
the natives from their land. Yet the Great Mahele "remains a major
landmark in Hawaiian history," and it has been said that "probably no
single event so drastically changed the social system of Hawaii."
It made possible the investment of capital with security. From it
stemmed the rise of the sugar industry which soon dominated the
course of Hawaiian economy, politics, and foreign relations.
The death of Kamehameha III in 185*+ closed the period of Hawaii's
transition from the feudal autocracy of the old culture to a Christian
nation governed by a constitutional monarchy, with rights of suffrage
and land ownership extended to all classes of people. In the transition, the socio-religious character of the ancient culture was swept
2
away; and most of its material aspects had begun to disappear.
It is true that some of the missionaries and their families
profited from the reforms they had advocated. In 18^9 the American
1
Morgan, Hawaii, 139; Lawrence H. Fuchs, Hawaii Pono: A Social
History (New York, I961), 1*1.
2
Dorothy B. Barrere, Summary of Hawaiian History and Culture (typewritten, Honolu, I961J, $5.
30
Board proposed that the Hawaiian Mission should become independent
of the home treasury, and many missionaries became concerned over their
security in old age. Others had long resented the necessity of being
dependent upon donations for support. "We think it would be better
for American missionaries everywhere to be allowed to hold property,
and honorably help themselves," said one expression of missionary
opinion.
Thus the missionaries and their children and other relatives
were among the foreigners who began to acquire property by gift
from the chiefs or by purchase at low prices. As early as 1850 the
Honolulu Times, an anti-missionary weekly, advised persons wishing
to obtain land in the islands to "Goto Boston and be appointed a
2 missionary," In 18^2 there were 20 missionaries who owned no land
and 16 others who among them had acquired 7,886 acres.
This entrance of certain "Pilgrims" into land speculation and the
interest shown by many, particularly the younger generation, in business and agriculture were not unaccompanied by complaints back home
and in the islands about "worldliness," but on the whole even the
missionaries themselves saw no wrongdoing in these activities. "The
disposition to accumulate is human, it is American and more; properly
guarded and for right ends it is Bible," wrote Dr. Judd in 1852.
1
Cheever, op, cit., 79*
2
Adams, op. cit,, 1*3
3Gerrit P. Judd, The Letters of Dr. Gerrit P. Judd, 1827-1872
(Fragments II, Honolulu, 1911), 193-
31
thrift and enterprise were what the missionaries preached to the
natives, and they believed they were setting a good example. By improving their lands and experimenting in agriculture, they hoped to
show the Hawaiians how t o progress.
In summing up the net effect of the missionary effort, i t is difficult not to agree with Robert Louis Stevenson, who wrote tha t "with al l
their deficiency of candour, humour,and common sense, the missionaries
are the best and most useful white's in the Pacific. " And after reviewing the results of missionary activity in bringing order to the Hawaiian
government, there seems t o be much justic e in the recent statement of
the Hawaiian Evangelical Association tha t the missionaries pointed the
way "down the path that has ultimately led us to Statehood."
Adams, op. cit» , kk.
32
Chapter IV
"Sugar Engrosses Everything"
The funeral procession of Kamehameha III wound through the
streets of Honolulu with an impressive display of the ancient Hawaiian
pomp and ceremony• But the hearts of the people were not in the spectacle. By 1854 even the carefree natives could see that their days of
power were done, that the show of former glory was only a sham.
The population of the islands was at a new low. The census of
lB53 revealed a total of 73,138 -- a drop of more than 35,000 since
the previous count in 1835. The prophecy of a native priest that
"the hibiscus shall grow, the coral shall spread and stretch forth
its branches, but man shall cease," was repeated inournfully through
the kingdom.
Although the foreigners numbered only about one fortieth of the
population, they already held most of the political power. Dr. Judd
had been eminently successful in his attempt to give stability to
the government by introducing foreigners into the key offices, so
much so that native Hawaiians were practically eliminated from the
cabinet. But Judd had hoped that the natives could gradually be
trained to govern themselves; most of his successors in high office
had little desire to be ruled by Hawaiians. Alert and intelligent,
the natives were guick to detect this prejudice, and they resented it,
Even before the Great Mahele, large tracts of land had been transferred to foreigners under long lease. With few exceptions, the
Hawaiians did not follow the lead of the whites in developing plantations, but they were deeply concerned at the passage of land to
^Morgan, Hawaii, 120.
33
foreign control. An old Hawaiian saw an American sighting distances from the mountains to the sea in 18^7 and complained, "They
are measuring our lands and even our mountains; they are all
slipping from us -- and where are the Kanakas going to live."
After the land legislation of iBhQ and 1850 the proportion of land
owned by foreigners progressively increased* Sixty-four per- cent
of the government lands sold before 1886 went to foreigners; and
by 1896 they owned 57 per cent of all taxed lands, An additional
large percentage was controlled by lease.
Such factors caused a growing native resentment against foreigners in general and against the missionaries in particular. This
antipathy against the puritans from New England was shared by the
young and handsomely bearded Kamehameha IV, who formally acceeded
to the throne on January 11, lS55» Raised under strict missionary
control, he was intelligent and well educated — and thoroughly
bored with sermons and temperance lectures. "Having been compelled
to be good when a boy," sadly commented his mentor Dr. Judd in
2
l86l, "he is determined not to be good when a man."
During a trip abroad while still a youth, the new Icing had developed a strong admiration for the forms of British government
and church. He dreamed of recreating in Honolulu the aristocratic
glitter of the Court of St. James. On the other hand, his dislike
of -Americans had been sharpened when a conductor on a New York railroad had mistaken him for a Negro and ordered him out of the car.
Stella Jones, "Economic History of Hanalei" (Typewritten, for
Coinmunity Studies of Kauai, I9U5).
2
Judd, Hawaii, 83«
3^
Thus the reign of ICamehameha IV marked the end of American
missionary predondnance in the Hawaiian government. While several
of his chief advisors were Americans, he gradually drifted away
from their influence, and at his death in 1863 there was not a
single American in the cabinet. His closest advisors were
British, and his reign resulted in a revival of British ascendency
in island politics.
Kamehameha IVs rule started auspiciously enough. In 1856, at
a joyful ceremony in Kawaiahao Church, he married Emma Rooke,
amiable granddaughter of John Young and a descendant of the
Kamehameha line. The early death of their child and other domestic
tragedies, however, soon ended their happiness and turned their
minds more deeply toward religion, resulting in the introduction
of the Episcopal Church and its rise to a position of prominence.
Upon the premature death of Kamehameha IV in 1863 he was succeeded by his brother, who took the name Kamehameha V. A "portly
and positive bachelor," the new ruler was to be the last monarch
to bear the name of the founder of the kingdom. Experienced in
the ways of government, energetic, and capable, he brought to the
throne the same pro-British and anti-missionary prejudice which
had marked his brother's reign, More important, he believed he
should revive the benevolent despotism of his grandfather, Kamehameha
the Great, and rule as an autocrat for the good-of his people.
At his accession he refused to swear to uphold the liberal
Constitution of 1852, which, among other things, provided for universal manhood suffrage. He feared that the vote in the hands of
35
the landless would lead to demagoguery, then to a republic, and
then to annexation by the United States. "Hawaii has scarcely
emerged from a feudal state/' he declared, "and already the American
influence pushes us toward a republic."
When a constitutional convention in 1864 failed to produce a
document to his liking, he dissolved it. "I will give you a Constitution," he told the members; and a week later he signed a new
instrument of government. It strengthened the royal power and provided property and educational qualifications for legislators and
voters. The missionaries, their noses already out of joint at
being replaced in influence by the Anglicans, were dismayed sfc this
setback for the American democratic principles they had sponsored.
They pointed out with heat that if the king could give a new constitution he could also take it a;ay at his whim. Dr. Judd, reflecting
the attitude of the foreigners who realized that they could not
win influence in the government unless the power of the king were
confined, predicted disorders, but in reality the new constitution
proved to be a stabilizing factor and remained in force for 23 years.
Two actions demonstrate the king's sincere desire to rule well.
In 1865 he refused to approve a proposed bill which would have removed the penalties for supplying liquor to natives. "I will never
sign the death warrant of my people," he announced. During the
same year he signed the law which resulted in the establishment of
a leper colony on Molokai to cope with the scourge which had
appeared some years earlier.
A. Grove Day, Hawaii and Its People (New York, 1955), 150.
36
ICamehameha V, "the last great chief of the olden type," died
in 1872 without a designated heir to succeed him. It was left
for the legislature to select a new king from the nobility, but
the people were given a chance to express their preference at a
plebiscite held on January 1, 1873. The popular favorite was Prince
W. C. Lunalilo, the large, affable, but also frail and sensitive,
high chief familiarily known to all as "Prince Bill." His election
was almost a foregone conclusion, since the natives responded to
the new responsibility in the traditional manner by giving their
support to the highest ranking chief. Mourners returning home
from Kamehameha V's funeral, "hugging their unfinished gin bottles,"
were heard to state that "of course" Lunalilo would be the next
king. Nevertheless another chief, David Kalakaua, conducted a
spirited campaign, urging the people "not to be led by foreigners"
and promising to put native Hawaiians into governmental offices.
Understanably) the foreign residents breathed easier when Lunalilo,
"the People's King," was swept into office by a unanimous vote.
The new reign opened propitiously as far as the foreign interests were concerned. Lunalilo was friendly to Americans, and they
composed the majority of his cabinet. He proposed to abolish
property qualifications for voting and took steps toward restoring
many provisions of the liberal constitution of I852. Yet there was
an uneasy realization that the precedent of electing the king inaugurated a potential threat, since the numerically superior native
population, showing ever-increasing signs of nationalism, might on
another occasion vote in an anti-foreign candidate.
37
One of the most significant facts of Hawaiian history is the
paradoxical one that during the very years l85^-l8?2 when American
influence was practically eliminated from the government, the
Americanization of Hawaii went on more rapidly than ever hefore.
This Americanization was partly cultural. The missionaries, the
traders, the sailors had introduced American hooks, American songs,
American customs, and even American holidays. A visitor from the
United States noted that "Honolulu is as much an American town as
any town in this country."
But even more, Americanization was economic. As the influence
of the missionaries faded, that of the trader and the planter came
to the fore. The two influences combined to forge the Hawaiian
society which existed until World War II.
Prom the l830's until the outbreak of the American Civil War,
the principal stimulus to the Hawaiian economy and the greatest
source of wealth was whaling, an industry almost completely dominated
by Americans. The peak period of this trade came between 18^3 and
i860. The whalers demanded vast quantities of firewood and prodigious amounts of vegetables, fruit, and meat. Diversified agriculture
was stimulated; and farms flourished on the temperate flanks of
Haleakala and other mountains.
Then, with the opening shots of the Great Rebellion, this golden
age suddenly ended. The price of beef and other farm products
plummeted, and soon several business houses closed and left the
islands. Although there was a partial recovery of the whaling trade
after the war, the business soon went into a permanent decline due
William Adam Russ, Jr., The Hawaiian Revolution (1893-9^)
(Selinsgrove, Pennsylvania, 1959)> 5*
38
to rising costs, depletion of the whaling grounds, competition
from petroleum products, and a combination of other causes. With
the removal of this last effective spur to general farming, agriculture went through an uncertain state of transition. After experiments in sheep, rice,and other products, attention was concentrated on sugar. This latter crop quickly became Hawaii's new
chief source of wealth, and its domination of the economy led directly
to ever closer ties with the United States and, eventually,
to annexation.
The discovery of the crop best suited to Hawaii's climate,
labor supply, and market was a long and painful process which
brought disaster to many enterprising and hopeful planters. Repeated attempts to develop cotton as a crop and manufacturing industry were made from 1812 until after the Civil War, but despite
promising yields Hawaiian cotton could not compete in price with
that raised in the southern United States, Coffee was first
planted on Oahuabout 1817, then on the Kona Coast of Hawaii, snd
then, from about 1835 to l8^5> on a large scale on Kauai; but
again production proved difficult and uneconomical. The California
Gold Rush provided a ready market for white potatoes and other vegetables, but the boom soon collapsed. Wheat, silk, rice, tobacco,
and even pineapples were other crops which were tried but'VhicVfailed
to provide a solid basis for the island economy.
Only cattle raising proved able to compete with sugar as a longrange, large-scale agricultural enterprise. Livestock introduced
by Vancouver and other mariners increased rapidly in the Hawaiian
39
environment until they actually became a hazard to agriculture.
Ranching was one form of labor which the Hawaiians entered into with
Joy; and before 1830 they had absorbed the techniques of the cowboy
from vaqueros brought in from Mexico and California. Between 1850
and 1870, particularly, the industry developed rapidly, both on ranches
owned by whites and native chiefs and on government lands where cattle
ran wild. The roughness of the mountain slopes used by the cattlemen
prevented the ranges from being absorbed by the expanding sugar industry, but at the same time the capacity of the ranges was Comparatively
fixed. Thus the cattle industry reached maturity by the early 1870*s,
and production was relatively stable during the remainder of the century.
Meanwhile, sugar had been coming to the fore. Cook had found
sugar cane growing wild and being cultivated by the natives on a
small scale in 1778, &nd from that time many foreign residents and
visitors dreamed of becoming rich through sugar cultivation. A
Chinese visitor on Lanai is said to have produced a little sugar as
early as 1802; and there are records of sugar manufacture by crude
methods on Oahu in 1819 and through the 1820!s on both that island
and on Maui* An enterprising but tubercular English agriculturist
named John Wilkinson set out 100 acres of cane in Manoa Valley in 1825
under the patronage of the local governor, but he soon died; and M s
successors, making rum from the product, ran afoul of the missionary
influence and saw their fields forcibly planted to sweet potatoes.
Such early ventures were of little commercial importance. The
real beginning of the sugar industry came in 1835 when Peter Allan
Brinsmade, William Ladd, and William Hooper -- all New Englanders
HO
with missionary connections who had come to Honolulu in 1833 to
establish a "mercantile trading house" — decided that the greatest
commercial opportunities in the islands lay in agriculture. Under the
name of Ladd & Co. they leased 9^0 acres of land at Koloa, on the
island of Kauai, and established "Hawaii's first large-scale sugar
plantation."
After overcoming many obstacles, the young manager, William Hooper,
got his fields and the accompanying mill in successful production, only
to see the whole enterprise lost when the firm overextended itself
financially. But in 181*8 the Koloa Plantation came into the ownership of Dr. Robert W. Wood, who amply demonstrated that sugar production could be profitable. Ladd & Co, inaugurated the Hawaiian practice
of operating and financing plantations by central agencies in Honolulu;
and the methods devised by Hooper for housing and caring for laborers
set a pattern which was followed by the entire industi-y for more than
a century.
The Koloa Plantation stimulated other ventures in sugar throughout the islands. With land ownership made possible by the Great
Mahele, there soon followed the period in which "hard-driving missionaries and sons of missionaries, Yankee sea captains and whalers,"
and enterprising German, Irish, British, and Norwegian immigrants
started plantations and the mercantile houses which went with them*
Sugar production increased rapidly, with exports rising from a reported 2 tons in 1837 to 288 tons in l8h0 and 722 in i860. These
quantities were in addition to those consumed locally and to the
very substantial amounts of molasses exported. By l86l there were 22
hi
plantations in operation, and production, stimulated by high prices
during the Civil War, boomed. By 1865 exports were up tenfold, to
7,659 tons. In 1875 they amounted to 12,5^0 tons.
This expansion was made possible only by a number of technical
improvements which enabled Hawaiian sugar to compete with that grown
in the Philippines and in other countries where labor or transportation costs were lower. The first major irrigation ditch was placed
in operation at Lihue, Kauai, in 1856; better varieties of cane stocks
were imported; and a deep plow, centrifugal machines, steam power,
large-scale fertilization, the vacuum pan, and a number of other
innovations were introduced during the l850Ts and l860's.
It quickly became apparent that sugar was a big business, requiring large quantities of capital for large-scale operations and
improvements. There was no chance for the small farmer in sugar.
Producing sugar was also an integrated operation, requiring mills
close to the fields. Thus a trend toward centralized control and
toward larger and fewer plantations eventually developed.
In the early days of the industry individual planters generally
attempted to market their sugar through sea captains; and they ordered
their supplies, machinery, and equipment directly from the sources,
often from the United States or Europe, But plantation managers had
little time for such commercial matters, and gradually they entrusted
these functions to the Honolulu mercantile houses with which they did
business. The traders, left at loose ends by the decline of whaling,
were glad to find new occupations; and those with capital soon began
to finance the continuously expanding plantations. In this manner
h2
developed the agency system which became such a characteristic feature
of Hawaiian economy.
One of the first factors was Hackfeld & Company, a German-financed
firm which was reorganized as .American Factors, Ltd., during the
first World War. Another old firm, C. Brewer & Company, Ltd., became the agent for 3 plantations in I863 and quickly found sugar
"more profitable than whaleships." Other prominent agencies which
have survived were Theo. H. Davies & Company, Ltd.; and Castle &
Cooke, Ltd., which originated in l851« These four firms, together
with Alexander & Baldwin, Ltd., which began informally in the 1870's,
later comprised the "Big Five" sugar agencies which came to dominate
the industry.
Another important outgrowth of the expansion in sugar production
was the mass importation of foreign laborers to work the plantations.
This movement eventually resulted in the Hawaiians becoming a minority
group in their own land, and it vitally affected the social, political, and economic life of the islands.
The difficulty of obtaining an adequate supply of efficient —
which to the plantation managers often meant cheap and servile —
labor was a major handicap to the industry from the outset. The
native Hawaiians, as their services as sailors and cowboys demonstrated, could be superb workers when they chose to be, but they
displayed little enthusiasm for the steady, backbreaking toil required
for successful cane raising and harvesting. The declining population
contributed to the problem, and some persons feared that a severe
labor shortage was in the offing. One foreigner stated in I863,
"Unless we get more population, we are a doomed nation."
•a
The British-born Hawaiian foreign minister expressed doubt that
the native race could "withstand the shock which the overwhelming
wave of Anglo-Saxon energy, enterprise, and cupidity has given it. "
Laws against the emigration of natives and providing for contract
labor demonstrate tha t the situation wa,s, taken seriously.
The earliest Chinese contract laborers were members of a group
of about 300 coolies imported during l8£>2. Their reception by
the planters was at first enthusiastic . They were "quite, able,
and willing men," i t was reported, and bythe end of I865, 1,306
of them had been brought to the islands. Soon, however, there
began to be complaints. In addition to a "considerable disposition
t o hang themselves," the newcomers tended to drift off the plantations when their contracts expired, entering into "distressful
competition with the whites and Hawaiians as merchants, store -
keepers, mechanics, and artisans. " They also displayed "cunning"
by beginning to press for "advantages,"
Disenchanted, the planters and the Hawaiian government began
t o seek more docile workers. Agents probed the distant corners
of the earth, with far-reaching results. South Sea islanders were
tried , unsuccessfully. In 1868 a group of 1*±8 Japanese was recruited
by the Hawaiian consul in Japan, The importation of Portuguese
began in 1878; and large-scale recruitment of Japanese started
about I885. Between 1877 and 1890 about 55,000 laborers were
brought into the islands. By the latte r year the tota l population
of 90,000 included 15>000 Chinese, 12,000 Japanese, and 9,000
Portuguese. As tne workers in each nationality group became
Morgan, op. git. , 190.
kk
aclimated, they showed more independence; and thus the Chinese,,
Japanese, and Portuguese successively fell into disfavor, and the
planters sought new sources of labor. The employers gradually
developed an interest in recruiting workers of mixed races who
"could less readily unite over issues of wages or work conditions."
This burgeoning mercantile and agricultural economy was snugly
in American hands. In 1844, four of the six general or commission
merchants in Honolulu were American; and of 15 other shops, 11
were operated by Americans. Not even the powerful Hudson's Bay
Company — whose Honolulu agency, opened in 1834, was called
Aienui, "the big debt," by the natives who ran up large bills there —
could restore the old British ascendancy, although its operations
were aggressively competetive. The whaling business of the l84o's
to l86o's was largely American, and in 1863 the American Minister
in Honolulu reported that at least 80 per cent of Hawaii's foreign
commerce was under American control.
The same condition came to prevail in the dominant sugar industry. In 1893 the capitalization of all the incorporated sugar
interests in the islands amounted to $28,274,000. Of this total
value, $21,554,975> or more than two-thirds, was controlled by
Americans and Hawaiian-born Americans, British interests, amounting to only $4,303,218, were a poor second. Equally significant
was the fact that the United States was the chief market for Hawaiian
sugar. By 1875 Hawaii was annually exporting about 24,000,000
pounds of sugar to the United States and only about 1,000,000
pounds to all other nations. Such economic facts shaped the course
Morgan, oj>. cit., 191,
^
of Hawaiian political and social history from the l860's until the
annexation of the islands to the United States.
This economic situation explains why the foreigners., chiefly
Americans, were determined to exert a stronger influence in the
Hawaiian government after the death of the autocratic Kamehameha V
in 1872. The chief har to their greater prosperity was the American
tariff on sugar; and as early as 1848 they began a long campaign to
persuade Washington to sign a reciptocity treaty which would admit
Hawaiian-grown sugar and other articles without duty. Such a treaty
could not he obtained without the cooperation of the Hawaiian government. Also, the approval of the royal government was required for the
continued importation of contract labor; and further, the merchants
and planters wanted a stable, responsible, and economical government
to assure preservation of property rights.
It is not surprising, therefore, that many American residents
came to feel the annexation to the United States was the only
sound solution to their problem. In February, 1873, a Honolulu
newspaper reported that there was "unquestionably" a large party,
"respectable in point of wealth and position, that is now openly and
earnestly advocating . . . annexation." But the time was not yet
ripe for such a measure.
The foreigners were somewhat reassured by the pro-American
leanings and liberal tendencies displayed by King Lunalilo upon
his accession in 1873," but after only a year and 25 days in office
he died early in 1874, Like his predecessor, he had refused to name
Fuchs, Hawaii Pono, 20.
46
an heir; and the throne was again to be filled by vote of the legislature. Many foreigners were dismayed by the instability of the
situation. In later years some of them fancied that after the
extinction of the Kamehameha line, they had permitted Hawaii "to
continue the monarchical form of government as a matter of courtesy
rather than right." But in fact they were still too weak to end
the monarchy and had to settle for supporting the candidate who
seemed least dangerous to their interests.
There were two contenders: Prince Kalakaua, the nationalistic
chief who had been defeated by Lunalilo in 1873; and Queen Dowager
Emma, widow of Kamehameha IV. Though loved and respected by both
natives and foreigners, Queen Emma was believed by many to be favorable to England; and it was feared that her accession would reduce
chances for a reciprocity treaty with the United States. Thus the
Americans, in the cabinet and out, interefered to assure the election
of Kalakaua. Sanford B. Dole later said that the little steamer,
the Kilauea, owned by an American, was sent around the island's to
collect the legislators before popular support could crystallize
behind Queen Emma; and at an election held only $ days after Lunalilo's
p
death, Kalakaua was duly chosen as king.
When the results were announced to the crowd outside the courthouse in Honolulu, an angry roar, "as though a stick had been
twisted in a giant beehive," rose from Queen Emma's supporters;
and a riot of joyful ferocity ensued. Order was restored by marines
Honolulu Commercial Advertiser as quoted in Russ, op. eft., 18.
Sanford B. Dele, Memoirs of the Hawaiian Revolution (Honolulu,
1936), 3^-37.
hi
landed from American and British warships in the harbor, but the
fundamental weakness of the monarchy had been exposed for all to
see, and a precedent of armed interference to protect foreign interests had been established.
Kalakaua at first cooperated with the Americans who had assisted
him to power. His initial cabinet was formed of honest and able
men acceptable to the foreign community. And when in June, 187k,
he received a petition from nearly every important factor, merchant,
and planter in the kingdom requesting him to negotiate a reciprocity
treaty with the United States, he responded favorably. In fact,
he went to Washington himself "to throw his ample bulk and jolly
nature" behind the official Hawaiian envoys charged with negotiating
the treaty.
The Grant administration and Congress proved not particularly
receptive to the proposal despite a barrage of Hawaiian propoganda.
The Hawaiians pointed to indications that Great Britain might be
building up her interests in the islands. Having sent about a
third of their sugar to Australia, New Zealand, and British Columbia
in 1873j they threatened to send their entire crop to the British
colonies in 1875-1876. But the Hawaiian market was too small to tempt
the United States into a reciprocity treaty; and Louisiana sugar
planters and New Englanders trading in West Indian sugar fought the
measure with tooth and nail.
In the end it apparently was the political arguments which prevailed. Senator George Sewell Boutwe11 of Massachusetts pleaded,
k3
"If we reject this treaty we transfer these islands eithe r t o
France or Great Britain, and ve diminish our markets, we diminish
our politica l power, we limit the influence of our institutions,
we circumscribe American ideas. " And, as finally approved, the
treat y contained a clause which gave the United States ultimate
control over Hawaii's foreign policy by providing that, as long
as the agreement should remain in effect, the kingdom should not
lease or otherwise dispose of any port or territory , or grant any
special rights or privileges therein, to any other nation.
This reciprocity treaty, which went into effect on September 9>
1876, has been termed "the most important event in the last twenty
2
years of the Hawaiian Kingdom." Perhaps these words are an understatement. The treaty was certainly the first firm and positive
step toward annexation. It placed Hawaii firmly in the political and
economic orbit of the United States, removing the possibility of
foreign control and so inextricably bindinglne kingdom's economy
with that of the United States that union was virtually inevitable.
And the treaty had another significant effect. It resulted
in a tremendous and sudden boom in the sugar industry. Now sugar
became "as profitable as gold mines were only hoped to be."-*
Judd, Hawaii, 95.
2Ibid., 93
Morgan, op. cit., 2lA*
k9
About 20,000 acres of additional land were put in production within
6 years. Sugar output more than doubled in h years. Fresh capital
flowed into the islands, and vast improvements, such as the Hamalaia
Ditch on Maui, were undertaken to swell production still further.
Within 15 years tonnage had increased tenfold, and thereafter it
doubled every 10 years. In I89I the kingdom sent 27^983,295
pounds of sugar to the United States and only 285 pounds to the
rest of the world.
By 1898 nearly two-thirds of all labor in Hawaii was employed
on sugar plantations. All other enterprises took second place
to sugar. Sugar was Icing, faro patches, small home plots,
coffee plantations, rice fields — all were swallowed up before
advancing sugar, with widespread social and economic effects.
Observing these, conditions, one contemporary historian could only
say, "Sugar engrosses everything.,t The social and economic leadership which once had belonged to the chiefs and then to the missionaries had passed to the planters*
Russ, op. cit,, 33.
50
Chapter V
"This Party-spirited Settlement"
The Hawaiian ship of state did not reach the safe harhor of
United States protection, assured by the reciprocity treaty of
I876, without passing through many squalls and narrowly escaping capture by European powers. Yet, a review of her progress
through the stormy seas of foreign relations reveals that for
nearly a century she had been steering a general course in the
direction of the American Republic.
The first Europeans to touch the Hawaiian Islands were struck
by the apparent happiness of the natives and sensed that Western
civilization and rule would introduce a blight into this idyllic
Eden. Captain Cook expressed the hope that foreign governments
would not be established over the Pacific isles, and he made no
attempt to take possession of the Hawaiian chain for Great Britain.
The French explorer, the Count de la Perouse, was even more
emphatic in voicing his views. Anchoring his two frigates off
southern Maui, this great navigator who had aided the Americans
during their war for independence, sent a force ashore on Jfey 30,
1786. Evidently his men were the first Europeans to set foot on
Vh\xL, but La Perouse none the less refused to take possession in
the name of the king of France. "The customs of Europeans on such
occasions are completely ridiculous," he commented in his Journal;
he preferred to leave to the sovereignty of its own people an island
"fertilized by the painful exertions of its inhabitants, and for
51
many ages the tomb of their ancestors."
But such humanitarian reflections of the Age of Enlightenment
did not long prevail. When the English explorer George Vancouver
touched the islands during 1792-179** he gave Kanahameha some sound
advice and even assisted the king in effecting a reconciliation
with his favorite wife. The native ruler was so impressed with
English wisdom and rectitude that, with the consent of his chiefs,
he offered to place the island of Hawaii under British protection.
Vancouver promptly accepted the "cession" and hoisted the British
flag. Probably the king had merely intended to obtain a British
protectorate in order to strengthen his hand against his enemies;
and, in any event, the British government never confirmed the
action. The only long-range result was to create a somewhat hazy
tradition of British pre-eminence in the islands.
A more serious attempt to bring the islands under European rule
was made two decades later when the Russian bear stretched out a
paw from Alaska and nearly snatched up Hawaii* Seeking foodstuffs
for its northern settlements, the Russian American Company began
to send trading ships to the islands about 1607; and there is
evidence that at least as early as 1809 the Russians were thinking about making a settlement there. The idea of a protectorate
Hathuria Dondo, La Perouse in Maui (Wailuku, Maui, 1959)> **5»
52
apparently was in the minds of at least some Russian merchants
and officials.
At any rate, Dr. Oeorg Anton Scheffer, an overambitious and
everbearing company agent, persuaded the king of Kauai in l8l6
to grant extensive privileges on that island and on Oahu to the
Russians; and soon the Russian flag was waving over two forts on
Kauai, Alarmed by Scheffer1s activities and encouraged to take
action by American traders, Kamebameha had Scheffer expelled in
1817• Scheffer's bungling caused the Russians to disavow his actions.
The government policy apparently became one of waiting for a more
propitious moment; hut the intervention of American interests to
counteract the company's move was an indication that a chance for
effective Russian action would never again appear.
The arrival of the first American whalers in 1819 and the
coming of the missionaries during the next year were to lead quickly
to American pre-eminence in island affairs. The first official
United States representative was dispatched to Hawaii in 1820, One
result was the negotiation of a treaty of navigation and friendship in 1826, but the agreement was not ratified by the United States.
However, the convention was notable as being the first international
compact signed by Hawaii, and the kingdom long continued to abide
by its terms,
British and French interests did not intend to let the American
bid for power go unchallenged, Great Britain strengthened the old
tradition of alliance by showering attentions on the Hawaiian monarchs. In 1822 a six-gun schooner was donated to the kingdom; and
53
Plan of Old Russian Fort built in 181/ at \\ aimea, Kauai, as drawn in 1885. Hawaii Slate Archives Iliulugiaph
and in 1824 King Liholilo and his consort were feted in London.
After the unfortunate deaths of the royal couple, their bodies
were returned in state aboard a British frigate.
France found an opportunity to interfere when the Hawaiian kingdom banned Catholic priests. The French government considered itself the protector of Catholic missionaries in the Pacific and
chose to believe that the Hawaiians had committed a national affront.
Captain C. P. T. Laplace was dispatched in the 60-gun frigate Artemise
with orders to use force, if necessary, to demonstrate "the wrath of
France." Arriving off Honolulu in 1839* ^ trained his guns on the
town and compelled the authorities to sign a treaty recognizing
Catholicism, permitting importation of French merchandise, including
liquors, and giving French lawbreakers the right of trial by juries
of foreigners. Laplace duly noted the increasing i&nerican influence
and reported to his superiors that "the Sandwich Islands will belong
some day to the masters of California."
Following this incident, continued clusterings and intrigues by
French civilians and officials convinced many Hawaiian residents,
both native and foreign, that France would "take the first reasonable
opportunity, to reduce the islands to subjection.1'
2
^Foster Ehea Dulles, America In the Pacific (Boston, 1932), 1^9.
2Gustavus Hines, Life on the Plains of the Pacific (Buffalo, l85l),84.
5^
Richard Charlton, the British Consul, seemed determined to
bring Hawaii under the rule of his government, and he stirred up
a dispute over a land claim with the object, it seemed to many,
of inducing Great Britain to intervene in Hawaiian affairs, These
maneuvering8, as well as the continued contests among the citizens
of several nations for control of the royal government, gave an unusual bitterness to the rivalries of trade. Business and policies
in Honolulu were conducted in an atmosphere of "short-tempered bickering," recrimination, and white-hot argument.
The officials of the Hudson's Bay Company advised their representatives in the islands to avoid entanglements in these political
squabbles but admitted that detachment probably was impossible.
During a visit to Honolulu in 18^2 Sir George Simpson, the Company's
American governor, assessed the situation. "I am not quite clear,"
he wrote to his traveling companion, "that during the fortnight we
have been here, we have escaped being contaminated by the political
atmosphere of this party-spirited Settlement."
Thoroughly alarmed by the foreign threat and torn by the resultant internal dissension, the royal government dispatched a mission
to the United States, France, and Great Britain to negotiate treaties
recognizing Hawaiian independence. Sailing in mid-18^2, the commissioners first visited Washington. There they found that the United
1 E . E. Rich (ed.), The letters of John McLoughlin . . . Second
Series, 1839>W» (Hudson's Bay Record Society Publications, VX;
London, I9S3), 280,
55
States was already alert to the importance of the islands to
American whaling and trading operations. Although there was yet
no disposition to annex such a distant land, the country was
determined to protect its growing interests in the islands and
would not restrict its freedom of action by Joining other nations
in a convention guaranteeing Hawaiian independence. Secretary of
State Webster announced that the United States was more interested
in the islands than any other country could be, and he declared
that Hawaii should not be brought under the exclusive control of
any foreign power.
President Tyler later amplified this statement by announcing
that while the United States did not intend to acquire the islands,
it would view with dissatisfaction any attempt by another nation to
take possession. IhiB bold stand, taken at a time when the United
States had not yet expanded its boundaries to the Pacific, was the
"first official indication" that "we considered American relations
with the islands in a somewhat different category from the relations
between Hawaii and the rest of the world."*
The wisdom of the Hawaiian mission was soon evident. In August,
18U2, a French warship arrived, and her commander, Captain S. Mallet,
made demands which would virtually have given French residents a
a 11 • 1 —^,1, 1 „ I,,,,
Dulles-/ 2£» cit*, I50.
56
controlling influence in the government. The king refused to yield,
stating that a new treaty with France was to be negotiated. Captain
Mallet apparently hesitated to act under these circumstances, and he
soon departed.
Another and more serious test quickly occurred. British consul
Charlton had complained that British subjects in Honolulu, including
himself, had been treated unfairly by the Hawaiian government; and
during February, 1843, Captain Lord George Paulet in H.M.S. Carysfort
arrived to force satisfaction. The demands made by this condescending
young man with "short chestnut hair curling all over his head" were so
drastic that no sovereign power could have accepted them. He refused
to be put off by pleas that a treaty was even then under negotiation
in London; and it appeared to all that he was determined to force
annexation.
Powerless to fight back against the Carysfort!s threatened
broadsides, the Hawaiian monarch made a shrewd move. Undoubtedly upon
the advice of the former missionary, Dr. Gerrit Judd, he offered to
cede his kingdom to Great Britain temporarily until the affair could
be referred to London. Paulet fell into the trap and accepted the
cession* The Hawaiian flag was replaced by the standard of Great
Britain, and British forces marched into the fort in Honolulu. Thei r
band loudly played the air, "Isle of Beauty, fare thee well," a "refinement of cruelty" which, said Mrs. Judd, "could only emanate from
1
a woman."
Judd, Hawaii, 64. yj
For five months Baulet ruled the islands in a hi^-handed fashion.
Meanwhile, Hawaiian appeals for aid went both to the United States
and Great Britain. The American government shot off a protest to
London, the American minister tfcere being told tha t the United
States might feel justifie d "in interfering by force" to prevent the
islands from "falling into the Jtands of one of the great powers of
Europe." Early in July the U. S. S. Constellation appeared in
Honolulu, and Commander Lawrence Kearney protested Pauleys action and
saluted the Hawaiian flag.
Meanwhile Rear Admiral Richard Thomas, ccmmmnder of the British
Pacific squadron, had ascertained tha t Great Britain had no desire
to interfere in the Hawaiian government, and he hastened to Honolulu
to take corrective measures. He repudiated Paulet's action, and a t
a colorful ceremony on July 31 the Hawaiian flag was once more raised
t o the breeze. The king and the chiefs celebrated the restoration of
sovereignty by repairing to Kawaiahao Church for prayer; and the
commoners went on a ten-day spree which, reported a seaman named
Herman Melville, "beggars description. "
During the same year, France and Great Britain concluded agreements to recognize Hawaiian independence; and the United States sent
a full-fledged diplomatic agent to the islands, a t the same time re -
affirming America's vita l interest in an independent Hawaii. In 18^9
1
Dulles, o£. cit. , 153*
5a
a treaty of friendship and commerce between Hawaii and the United
States was signed and, this time> ratified.
This "complete recognition" of Hawaiian independence came almoBt
as another French assault was being made on island sovereignty.
After a series of troubles between the chauvinistic French consul
and Hawaiian authorities, Rear Admiral L. de Tromelin landed troops
in Honolulu and extensively damaged government buildings to demonstrate
that France intended to enforce its demands. He sailed away, but
another French warship arrived in 1851 and repeated the demands. This
time Kamehameha I U gave the American commissioner a sealed, provisional deed of Bession to be opened and acted upon Bhbuld the French
flag be raised; and the U. S.S. Vandalia prepared to defend the
American banner Bhould it be hoisted. The French found it convenient
to modify their demands and wilhdraw.
This event marked the end of French attempts to dominate the
islands by cannonballs. $y I85O it was becoming apparent to European
observers that if Hawaii were to lose its independence it would be to
the United States. Lord Palmerston is said to have told a Hawaiian
delegation in that year that annexation to the United States was "the
destiny of the Hawaiian Islands, arising from their proximity to the
State of California and Oregon and natural dependence on those
markets."
The American State Department protested both of France's last
demonstrations of force at Honolulu, but the Whig administration
IDulles, oj>. cit., 157 .
59
under President Fillmore was not expansionist in temperament and
hastened to hand back the 1851 deed of session* The return of the
Democrats to power in 1853, however, brought a change in policy* The
United States at this time was showing an intensified interest in
the Pacific, and Ctemmodore Perry was recommending naval bases in the
distant reaches of that sea. Public opinion on the Pacific Coast
openly agitated for annexation of the Hawaiian Islands, and for a
while there were rumors that California residents might take matters
into their own hands through filibustering expeditions. Secretary
of State William h. Marcy, determined to keep the eagle soaring after
the expansion to Texas, Oregon, and California, instructed the minister
in Paris to sound out the sentiment of the French government toward an
American annexation of Hawaii; and early in 185k he directed the
American commissioner in Honolulu "to treat" for the transfer of
the islands to the United States.
Meanwhile, sentiment for annexation was being fanned in Honolulu*
Ever since the "fine hand" of the king's pro-American advisors had
been made evident by the sealed cession document of 1851, the American
party had pressed annexation on Kanmehameha III. Disturbed by the
declining population, fears of European domination, threats of filibusters, and other discouraging circumstances which seemed to press
him on every hand, the king expressed a willingness to abdicate and
ordered his foreign minister to open negotiations with the American
commissioner.
A treaty of annexation was actually prepared, but action was delayed by Hawaiian insistence on being admitted to the Union as a
60
state and on payment of an annual pension of $300,000 by the United
States to the king and principal chiefs. It was believed that the
statehood provision was inserted by pro-English advisors who were
determined to defeat annexation. At any rate, all immediate hope
of ratification ended on December 15, 185** vhen Kamebameha III
died. His anti-American successor, Crown Prince Alexander, was
known to be entirely unreceptive to the idea of bargaining away
his right to rule.
Although this "first rehearsal" for annexation came to naught,
Secretary Marcy tried to salvage something by negotiating a reciprocity treaty for trade in 1855. 2he Senate refused to approve
it, largely due to the die-hard opposition of Louisiana sugar
growers.
Following the Civil War the State Department was again in the
hands of an expansionist, William H. Seward. In I867 he cautiously
advised the American minister in Honolulu that he might "receive
overtures" looking toward annexation, but there was no popular
support for such a move. A frustrated Seward was left to rail at
the public's absorption with domestic matters to the exclusion
"of the higher but more remote Questions Of national extension and
aggrandizement." Another reciprocity treaty was defeated during
the same year because the Senate was too busy with Reconstruction,
and, it seems, because certain senators feared that reciprocity
might block ultimate annexation.
1 Dulles, op. cit., 162•
— — 61
Although the American public appeared to have lost interest
in "Manifest Destiny" during the l860!s and l870!s, there was a
hard core of expansionists who looked forward to advancing the
frontier into the Pacific. Even President Johnson advocated
reciprocity as a guaranty of American interests "until the people
of the islands shall of themselves, at one distant day, voluntarily
apply for admission into the Union." In 1&73 Generals John M.
Schofield and B. S. Alexander recommended the acquisition of Pearl
Harbor for both commercial and strategic reasons.
As a matter of fact, it was expansionists who provided much of
the opposition to the reciprocity treaty which was submitted in
I875. It was largely to mollify these people who feared ratification
would block annexation that the clause giving the United States control
of Hawaiian foreign policy was inserted. Only then was the opposition
placated; and the treaty was ratified in I876 in the belief that it
paved the way for future annexation*
Another step in American expansion toward Hawaii was made when
the reciprocity treaty came up for renewal in 1884. Senate approval
was not obtained until I887 and then only after Hawaii agreed to
give the United States exclusive right to use invaluable Pearl Harbor
as a naval base.
Both England and France protested the Pearl Harbor cession and proposed a Joint declaration guaranteeing Hawaiian neutrality and independence. This suggestion came during the very year in which the
United States had proposed a similar tripartite arrangement for control of Samoa, yet Washington refused to consider it. Secretary of
62
State Bayard "made it clear that we could admit of no foreign restraint upon our Hawaiian policy whatever course ve chose to adopt."
As James G. Blaine had declared in l88l, Hawaii had become "an
integral part of the .American system, we could never consent to share
what responsibility ve had, and our position in the islands had to he
maintained both because of our duty to the Eawaiians and because the
islands represented the key to dominion of the Racific. Benevolent
neutrality rather than annexation or a protectorate was our policy,
he concluded, but should this be found impracticable 'this Government
would then unhesitatingly meet the altered situation by seeking an
avowedly American solution.1"
2 Although many Eawaiians did not yet
recognize it, their homeland was no longer an independent nation;
Dulles, og. cit., 164 .
2Dulies, og. cit., 164,
63 -64
Chapter VT
"Annexation .. . is Consummation"
An aura of good feeling surrounded the Hawaiian throne early
in 1875 when gracious, imposing King Kalakaua returned from his
gala visit to Washington, where his presence had done so much to
create a favorable atmosphere for the reciprocity negotiations.
But the "Merry Monarch's" honeymoon with his foreign subjects
quickly ended. Soon he began to act as if he did not realize that
American influence was predominant in the islands and as if he had
forgotten that American support had given him his crown,
A legislative act of 187k had restored universal suffrage, with
the result that the native Hawaiians found themselves possessed of
an overwhelming majority of the votes. Although personally democratic as well as kingly, Kalakaua saw in this situation an opportunity to revive the old chiefly tradition of personal rule. He
also hoped to restore the dominant position of the Hawaiian race
and to reduce the influence of the foreigners whom, as a class, he
heartily disliked. For more than a decade he skillfully appealed
to the mass of voters and through his personal prestige, patronage,
and catchwords was able to wield universal suffrage to great effect
as a weapon of political control.
In 1876 Kalakaua took a step which foreshadowed one of the chief
evils of his reign. As was his constitutional right, he dismissed
his cabinet and replaced it by a new set of ministers. These men were
capable, but the action set a precedent which was subject to abuse,
65
as was proved two years later when the cabinet was again dismissed
because it had refused to grant water rights on Maui to sugar magnate Claus Spreckels, who had won Kalakaua's good will through a
personal loan. In 1880 the Icing once more overturned the ministry
to place an Italian adventurer, Celso Caesar Moreno, at its head.
Public outcry at this betrayal of "the principles of constitutional
monarchy" was so great that Moreno was constrained to resign; but
Kalakaua continued his habit of frequenty seeking ministers ever
more amenable to his will, and whims.
The sugar boom which followed reciprocity brought revenues
pouring into the royal treasury in quantities "almost sufficient"
to meet the Icing's natural extravagence• One result of this prosperity was the decision to build a "proper" palace in Honolulu,
and the cornerstone of the elaborate, "Polynesian baroque" Iolani
Palace was laid in l879« Another splurge made possible by reciprocity was ICalakaua's gala trip around the world in l88l.
The thrifty puritans of the "Missionary Party," as the leading
foreign clique in Hawaii was known despite the fact that few of its
members had been missionaries, were shocked by Kalakaua's wild expenditures. Yet even the Americans were at first inclined to look
on tolerantly as the monarch ordered two jeweled crowns reputed to
cost $10,000 apiece or purchased a battery of Austrian field guns
for a reported $21,000. The tendency was to excuse such extravagences as merely expressions of the Icing's naturally high spirits,
for it was difficult to dislike this ebullient monarch who could <
66
discuss archeaology and arts with Henry Adams "as well as though he
had been a professor," and who could carry his liquor, according to
his friend Robert Louis Stevenson, "like a mountain with a sparrow on
its shoulders."
But after the king returned from his royal progress through the
courts of the world, his actions became increasingly irresponsible and
were no longer viewed with tolerant amusement. Expenditures such as
the $30^000 appropriation for Kalakaua's elaborate coronation ceremony
in 1883 seemed less harmless as time went on and as the national debt
pushed up to beyond $2,000,000. The king fell under the influence
of adventurers and opportunists who used their positions as royal
drinking companions and poker game opponents to wangle favors, concessions, and government offices. One "rare and slick rascal"
named Walter Murray Gibson actually controlled the Hawaiian government for five years.
Encouraged by Gibson's selfish flattery, Kalakaua began to dream
of becoming Emp<eror of Polynesia. To make a show of force in the
South Pacific he wasted $50,000 outfitting a warship for a disastrous voyage to Samoa, This rash venture was an outgrowth of
Kalakauafs increasing racism. Such slogans as "Hawaii for the
Hawaiians" were employed by Gibson and the king to rally native support behind the throne and to thwart foreign residents who wished
to reform the government.
Viewed in the most charitable light, Kalakaua was an imprudent
ruler. As scandals and corruption continued to mark his reign, he
took no effective measures to correct the situation. Such "trivial"
67
abuses as illegal land leases and the sale of public offices were
even extended to include the marketing of exemptions which permitted
lepers to escape exile to Molokai* The larger scandals included the
repeal of the liquor laws and the sale of an opium monopoly. Several
of the questionable transactions touched the ruling sugar interests
to the quick. In 1882 the legislature permitted Claus Spreckels,
an ''outsider/' to acquire 24,000 acres of crown land on Maui in
settlement of a claim for a mere $10,000. The government also
granted a subsidy to a Spreckels steamship line. By making loans
to the King, Spreckels, who had moved into Hawaii with the hope of
becoming the largest sugar producer, acquired additional influence.
As early as 1884 the foreigners organised a minority opposition,
but they could not halt the king's wayward course by legislative
means. About the beginning of 1887 a secret society called the
Hawaiian League was formed, and its members, who included many
native Hawaiians, acquired arms. An alliance was formed with the
all-white militia unit, the Honolulu Rifles; and several rifle clubs
were organized. The foreigners now controlled the most efficient
military force in the kingdom, and they were ready for effective
action.
The crisis came when it was learned that Kalakaua had profited
personally from the sale of an opium monopoly. One faction of the
Hawaiian League wished to march on the palace at once, overthrow the
monarchy, and annex Hawaii to the United States; but the conservative wing insisted that the king should be given another chance providing he would agree to a limitation on his powers. A mass
68
meeting of more than 2,500 persons, mostly foreigners, on June 30,
1887, unanimously demanded that Kalakaua dismiss his cabinet and
agree to specified reforms. The king recognized that the ultimatum
was backed by bayonets, and he capitulated. A new ministry was
appointed at once, and a hurriedly drawn constitution was signed on
July 6, 1887.
The Constitution of I887 was a liberal document in one sense,
in that the king could no longer dismiss his cabinet without the
consent of the legislature, and the king's veto could be overridden
by a two-thirds vote of the lawmakers. But thirteen years of experience under Kalakaua had disenchanted the foreigners with the
old American ideal of universal suffrage, so vigorously supported
by the missionaries. Under the new constitution the dominant part
of the legislature, the House of Nobles, was elected by voters who
possessed specified incomes or amounts of property. Foreigners
who could meet these qualifications were allowed to vote even
though they retained their foreign citizenships. Chinese and
Japanese, however, were barred from the polls. In short, the reigns
of government were placed firmly in the hands of the propertied
foreigners.
The native Hawaiians deeply resented the subordinate role forced
on them by the "bayonet constitution," and they were humiliated by
the circumstances under which their king had been shorn of his
powers. Their attitude was summed up by Kalakaua's sister,
Liliuokalani, who had been away attending Queen Victoria's Jubilee
at the time of the I887 reform action. When she returned to Honolulu,
69
she said of the new constitution and of the Pearl Harbor amendment
to the renewed reciprocity treaty, "It should not have been done*"
With "the desperate floundering of a people who feared extinction," the Hawaiians renewed • their alliance with the king and sought
some way to revive the royal powers. On July 30, I889, a group of
about 150 armed men under the command of a part-Hawaiian named
Robert W, Wilcox seized the palace grounds, evidently with a view
to restoring the Constitution of 186k, The cabinet called out the
volunteer military companies, composed largely of foreigners, and
soon rifle fire and dynamite bombs forced the rebels to surrender.
When Wilcox was tried for treason, he was acquitted because of his
claim that Kalakaua had sanctioned the uprising and "the king could
do no xrrong."
Unfortunately for the Reform Party, as the small but dominant
foreign political group was called, its ranks were soon torn by
dissension, and a number of foreign workers, opposed to the coolie
labor policy of the piarUtte,allied with the Hawaiians. Royalists
dominated the legislature elected in 1890,, and the Reform ministry
was replaced by a compromise cabinet. The propertied foreigners
had to admit political failure.
To"burst the bubble of Hawaiian content" still further, the McKinley
Tariff Act of I890, passed to reduce the surplus in the American
Treasury, placed all sugar on the free list and gave a bounty of two
cents a pound to American growers. Within a year the price of
Hawaiian sugar was cut in half, and a severe depression gripped the
island plantations. The growers, most of whom had previously
Judd, Hawaii, 101.
resisted the thought of annexation because of possible adverse effects
on the mass importation of contract labor, now agreed that their continued prosperity could only be assured by a union with the United
States* Both the merchant and professional group in Honolulu and
many of the planters were soon united in the belief that the future
stability and well-being of the islands depended upon the overthrow
of the monarchy and annexation. A secret Annexation Club was formed
in I892 to work toward this end.
The matter came to a head with the death of Kalakaua in 1891 and
the succession of the dignified and strong-willed Queen Liliuokalani.
The new ruler was even more of a nativist than her brother had been.
She was unalterably opposed to the Constitution of 1887 and was deterndred to restoreeroyal authority/ Her goal was tba patriotic one of
continuing Hawaiian independence, but she failed to see that she was
opposing a trend which had gone too far to stop.
After a long series of bickerings between the rival political
groups for control of the cabinet, the queen, early in 1893* signed
two controversial bills licensing opium and opening the door to the
Louisiana lottery; and she appointed a ministry of her own supporters*
These acts were offensive enough to the propertied white groups,
but on January Ik, 1893, Liliuokalani called a meeting of notables
at the palace and announced her intention of promulgating a new
constitution modeled after that of 3.86k, Her own ministers refused
to support this authoritarian measure, and the foreigners decided
that the time for decisive action had arrived.
A Committee of Safety, dominated by Honolulu lawyer, publisher,
and missionary descendant Lorrin A. Thurston and other members of the
71
Annexation Club, was organized to guide affairs, A mass meeting of
citizens on January 16 denounced the queen's actinn and authorized
the Committee to protect "life, liberty, and property in Hawaii."
The coirimittee added to the stature of their movement by selecting
the soft-spoken but athletic Sanford Ballard Dole, a much-respected
associate justice of the Hawaiian Supreme Court, to head a new
government. Dole at first suggested deposing the queen and replacing
her with Princess Kaiulani, the heir apparent, but he found the Committee determined to have no more dealings with the Kalakaua family.
The members said they were looking forward to annexation to the
United States "and so an end to our difficulties."
The next step was to consult with American Minister John L. Stevens,
already known as an outspoken annexationist. He quickly arranged to
land a force from the cruiser Boston, ostensibly to protect American
lives and property; and when shown a draft of the committee's intended
proclamation, he said "I think you have a great opportunity."
With the green light thus flashed on for revolution, the committee
seized the government office building on the afternoon of January 17,
I893, and issued a proclamation ending the monarchy and setting up a
Provisional Government "to exist until terms of union with the United
States of America have been negotiated and agreed upon."
American sailors and marines from the Boston "leaned on a picket
fence" across the street from the Aliiolani Hale and watched these
proceedings but took no part in them. Then, when Minister Stevens
almost at once accorded de facto recognition to the regime, the queen
Dole, Memoirs of the Hawaiian Revolution (Honolulu, 1936), 76-77.
72
not illogically concluded that the official hand of the United
States was behind the revolution. She therefore yielded under protest to the demands of the Provisional Government and surrendered her
power "until such time as the Government of the United States shall
upon the facts being presented to it undo the action of its representative." The monarchy founded b-- Kamaehameha the Great was dead.
The very next day the Provisional Government appointed five commissioners to negotiate a treaty of annexation, and they left immediately for Washington. They received a friendly welcome from the
Harrison administration. A treaty was signed on February Ik, 1893,
and at once submitted to the Senate with the President's warning that
it was "essential that none of the other great powers shall secure
the islands." But the Senate refused to be rushed, and no action was
taken before Harrison's term of office expired on March h and President
Grover Cleveland returned in triumph to Washington. This event had
a sudden and catastrophic effect upon the annexation proceedings.
Meanwhile, the Provisional Government found its position somewhat
precarious and requested Minister Stevens to place the islands under
the protection of the United States. The enthusiastic envoy agreed
at once and raised the American flag over the government building in
Honolulu on February 1. "The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe, and
this is the golden hour for the United States to pluck it," he told
Washington by way of explanation. This step, taken without the approval of the State Department, went too far even for the Harrison
administration, and it was disavowed. Oddly enough, however, the
American flag continued to fly over Honolulu as long as Stevens remained in office.
73
The submission of the annexation treat y to the Senate plunged
the American public into "its first major debate on the portentous
issue of imperialism." Many newspapers already favored national expansion and a big navy, and they shrill y cried, "Hawaii is welcome."
But there was an opposition press, largely Democratic, which urged
caution. Was al l the haste , these papers asked dueto a "sugar conspiracy"? Should America depart from its tradition of isolation
to embark on an imperialistic course? "Warily Brothers," urged a
widely printed jingle .
President Cleveland came into office suspecting tha t Queen
Liliuokalani had been wronged. A man of honor who believed that i t
was not the mission of the United States to go around "annexing
islands, " he withdrew the treat y from the Senate and sent former
Congressman James H. Blount to Honolulu with "paramount" authority
to investigate the revolution. "Paramount" Blount, as he came to
be called, quickly ordered the lowering of the American flag and,
although wined and dined by the propertied foreigners, soon made i t
clear that he did not subscribe to the theory tha t the natives did
not know what was good for them. He found tha t most of the Hawaiian
people favored the monarchy and were opposed to annexation.
After a thorough but perhaps not impartial investigation, Blount
reported to President Cleveland tha t the revolution would not have
succeeded without American assistance and without the "collusion"
of Stevens. Ee concluded thatttha new government could only regain-in power
through force , and he advise d* develand""J3-°'t
 *o continue anrExatLon pro-
&£P3S4l8g§B> sM^amghl^eddLd not reveal hlgrrecbT!aae^S£ixsas^M-2es|4iii
"Thomas A. Bailey, A Diplomatic History of the American People
(3rd ed., New York, 19^7), 471.
in the islands, his "royalist" leanings were apparent to all.
Probably not even Blunnt, a resident of Macon, Georgia, and a
former Confederate officer, was surprised when the Hawaiian Band
lustily serenaded him at his departure with the strains of "Marching
Through Georgia,"
Blount's report dampened annexation ardor in the United States,
and it caused President Cleveland to decide that American honor
required the restoration of Queen Liliuokalani to her throne. But
the new minister he appointed to broach the matter in Honolulu at
first found the deposed monarch regally determined to have the heads
of the principal revolutionists; and the Provisional Government
"respectfully and unhesitatingly" declined to surrender to the queen.
It was apparent that the pear could not be put back on the tree without the spilling of American blood. Cleveland recognized that public
opinion in the United States would not tolerate such a price on behalf of a Polynesian queen, and he diplomatically turned the problem
over to Congress, which, after acrimonious-debate, voted not to interfere in Hawaiian affairs.
Although political action on Hawaii was shelved until the advent
of a new administration, the public debate continued. The heady wine
of imperialism, already quickening the national pulses of European
and Asiatic nations, was beginning to titilate the American people.
A "big navy" group spearheaded the proponents of annexation, raising
fears of British power in the Pacific and urging "Let the Monroe
doctrine stay not its hand until it holds Hawaii securely in its grasp."^
Dulles, America in the Pacific, 18?.
75
The much respected exponent of sea power. Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan,
urged the acquisition of Hawaii on strategic grounds; and Henry Cabot
Lodge said it was"the plain duty" of the nation to annex the islands.
Such views were reflected in the Republican platform of I896 which
declared, "the Hawaiian Islands should be controlled by United
States and no foreign power should be permitted to interfere with
them,"
When it became evident that there would be no annexation as long
as President Cleveland remained in office, the leaders of the
Hawaiian Provisional Government acted to form a more permanent regime.
Despite protests of a mass meeting of royalists, a carefully screened
convention, on July 3> 189k, approved a new constitution drafted
largely by Dole and Thurston. There was no popular referendum, and
the next day Dole assumed office as President of the Republic of
Hawaii.
Although republican in form, the new government was by no means
a democracy. Property and income qualifications assureduiat relatively
few Hawaiians could vote or Itold legislative office. Orientals and
other recently arrived laborers were excluded from politics. Frankly
and openly, the Republic was established by force, maintained by force,
and designed to keep control of the state in the hands of a small group
of propertied whites, particularly those favorable to annexation. The
sentiments of the ruling "oligarchy" had been well expressed by '
There were no property qualifications required to vote for members
of the House of Representatives, but there were loyalty and other tests
which made the Hawaiians reluctant to register.
76
Miss Mary H, ICrout: "Shall what now exists -- society, wealth,
comfort, in which even the poorest shares « be dissipated by
hands incapable of administering law and order; or shall it be
transferred to those who created it, and who, in saving their own,
must save with it that which yet remains to the natives?"
The political control was not entirely in the hands of the sugar
interests. Many of the planters had been glad to see annexation delayed, since the gates for contract labor were thus kept open. The
economic crisis on the plantations was ended in 18<& wh&n the United
States Congress removed the domestic sugar bounty and in effect restored reciprocity. The growers were largely content to leave matters
as they were.
The dominant faction in the new government, rather, was a group
representing the merchant and professional leaders of Honolulu.
These men had, different ideas, while as anxious as the planters to
maintain control, many of them were disturbed by the growing tide
of Oriental labor. They desired to "Americanize" the islands, and
they attempted to persuade the growers to find European and American
sources of labor. They eased the restrictive conditions of labor
contracts, attempted to place limits on grants and leases of public
lands to encourage small farms, and made school attendance compulsory
for all children between 6 and 15 years of age. And they continued
to work for annexation. In these programs they reflected the missionary heritage which was strongly represented in the officialdom of the
Republic.
1Day, Hawaii, 217.
77
Despite these inner contradictions, the Hawaiian Republic survived. Followers of Liliuokalani attempted a counterrevolution
early in I895, but after two weeks of minor slcirraishing the rebellion
was crushed and its leaders, including the former queen and Robert W.
Wilcox, were placed under arrest. Hoping to win clemency for the
captured insurrectionists, liliuokalani renounced her throne and
urged support of the Republic. The ultimate effect of the movement
was to strengthen the position of the new government, although all
during the life of the Republic there were die-hard royalists, both
native and foreign, who hoped against hope that by some miracle the
monarchy could be restored. The Right Reverend Alfred Willis, the
Anglican bishop in Honolulu, continued to pray in public for Queen
Liliuokalani; and Hawaiian women patiently stitched Hawaiian flags
and composed songs of bitterness and rebellion.
As the result of its attempt to reduce the inflowing stream of
Orientals, the Republic soon found itself involved in a diplomatic
dispute with Japan. The BmxLre of the Rising Sun, swaggering somewhat after its recent victory over China, sent a warship to the
islands during May, 1897; but if its intention was to overawe the
Hawaiians thereby,the operation boomeranged. Sentiment for annexation both in Hawaii and the United States was sharpened by the
resultant wild rumors and renewed cries against the "Japanese bogey."
The united States ordered its minister in Honolulu to land naval
forces and take protective custody of the islands should Japan attempt to enforce its claims by armed threat.
The officials of the Hawaiian Republic had never ceased to press
for annexation, but they worked without any real hope of success
78
until the election of William McKinley in 1896 brought an abrupt
change in the picture. Even before the inauguration, Hawaiian
emissaries met with the president-elect and reported him as taking
"a lively interest in possible annexation." Spurred on by this "first
sound basis for encouragement," the commissioners negotiated an
annexation treaty on June 16, 1897, and McKinley forwarded it to the
Senate on that same day. President Dole visited Washington to stimulate enthusiasm for treaty, but despite the popular interest aroused
by this unusual picture of a ruler offering to lay down his office
in order that his country might join another, the measure languished
in the Senate.
Opposition to the treaty came from several sources. Japan entered
a formal protest; but her arguments were countered by the secretary
of state, and the opposition was in due course withdrawn. As usual,
American sugar interests did everything possible to block annexation.
But principally the debate was between the "Little Americans" and
the "Big Americans." Colonialism had not yet been universally accepted in the United States, particularly by the Democrats; and there
were still enough reluctant Democratic senators to prevent the required two-thirds vote for ratification. The New York Nation
exultingly declared that annexation was "dead beyond the hope of
resurrection."
All during the latter half of I897 the matter hung fire; but as
the new year turned and the threatened war with Spain became a
virtual certainty, President McKinley "made up his mind he would wait
1
no longer on Democratic pleasure. Hawaii had to be annexed,"
1Dulles, op. git,, 192.
79
Seizing upon the precedent which had served so well in the case
of Texas, the proponents of annexation determined to force the issue
hy a joint resolution, which would require only a simple majority of
Congressional votes. The new measure was introduced in the Senate
on March 16, I898.
The debates opened with arguments already familiar from long
repetition, hut the outbreak of the Spanish-American War on April 25
injected a new note. The issue, contested in the exciting atmosphere of patriotic fervor, was no longer merely the fate of Hawaii;
it was the national destiny itself: should the United States take
this first step in overseas expansion? The acquisition of the
Spanish colonies was already more than a possibility; the road to
imperialism and world power lay ahead. Should the nation, as the
"Little America" proponents urged, renounce the "unconquerable AngloSaxon lust for land" and confine itself to the American mainland;
or should it move toward complete control of the Pacific and toward
even more distant territorial acquisitions?
Actions in Hawaii helped settle the issue. Immediately upon
the outbreak of hostilities, the Hawaiian Republic determined to
break the laws of neutrality and assist the United States, The
American Havy was allowed to continue its coal piles ashore and to
use Hawaiian ports. The Spanish government lodged a protest which,
said President Dole, "we ignored." American troops passing through
Honolulu on their way to the Philippines were given a hearty welcome.
Proponents of annexation, both in Congress and out, agreed that such
Ethel M. Damon, Sanford Ballard Dole and His Hawaii (Palo Alto,
California, 1957), 330.
80
friendship deserved reward and that the strategic importance of the
islands had been demonstrated.
But it was the war enthusiasm which carried the day. The public
wanted to follow up Dewey's breathtaking victory at Manila with
some sort of action, ''Bridge the Pacific," urged the Philadelphia
Press, The President grew increasingly impatient, and it seemed
that he might annex the islands by executive order as a war measure*
"Obedient to the voice of the people, I shall cast my vote to take
them in," stated Representative Henry R. Gibson,
The pressure could no longer be opposed. Both houses passed
the resolution; and on July 7, 1898, President McKinley affixed
his signature, saying, with a remarkable grasp of the historical
realities, "Annexation is not change; it is consummation." Still
out of tempo with the times, former President Cleveland could only
mutter glumly, "I am ashamed of the whole affair."
As in 18U8, "Manifest Destiny" was in the saddle. Imperialism's
first fruit, "even though it was only little Hawaii," and even though
its acquisition was only the logical culmination of a long and gradual
movement, started the United States on a new path of expansion. The
debates on Hawaii were the rehearsal for those on the Philippines.
81
Chapter VII
"Our lup Is Bitter"
On the morning of July 13, 1696, fresident Dole paced the
shore at his cottage near Diamond Head,. Instead of his usual
Indian clubs he carried a telescope, which he kept trained on
the steamer Coptic as she approached Honolulu harbor. Suddenly
the ship blossomed with lines of signal flags. Dole rushed to
town to hear the news thus heralded i annexation was a reality.
A spontaneous celebration erupted throughout the city; but the
official ceremony of transfer was delayed until August 12, after
the arrival of the U.S. ~. Philadelphia with a United -tates flag
made at tae Dare Island navy fard especially for the purpose of
being raised over toe Hawaiian capitol.
The hoisting of this banner over lolani lalace was not the
joyous occasion many had anticipated, 'Hounds from the revolution
and the bitter annexation controversy were still raw; and even men
who had worked for years toward American rule found it difficult
to watch an independent nation die. The "tension of an execution"
gripped the crowd as the Hawaiian flag descended for the last
time. '.Then a double 21-gun salute broke tne spell there were few
dry eyes among the observers.
But during the ensuing weeks *nd. months residents of the
islands had a difficult time realising that any c.iange cf sovereignty had taken place. The annexation resolution stated that
82
until Congress provided a new government, Hawaii would be ruled as
tne President of the United states should direct. President
LcKiniey continued Dole and his associates in authorityj and for
two years Hawaiian consuls functioned throughout the world, and
Hawaii even went on collecting duties on imports from the United
States. But in at least one major respect things were different;
Congress had extended the Chinese exclusion Act of 1882 to cover
Hawaii; and the sugar growers accordingly placed even more reliance upon Japan as a source of plantation labor.
In December, 1898, five commissioners appointed by the .iresident recommended a proposed territorial constitution to Congress;
but the national legislature considered the matter with due deliberation, and the Organic Act which established the Territory of
uawaii was not signed until April 30, 1900. The government established by this legislation was uch like those of the four other
territories then in the United states, with a governor appointed
by the president and an elected bicameral legislature. A unique
feature, however, gave Hawaii control of its own public lands and
the revenues therefrom.
The new government went into effect on June 14, 1900; and on
that day President IcI'-inley's appointee .is Hawaii's first territorial governor, the respected • anford B. -ole, was inaugurated.
In his initial address, the new governor expressed his hope for
eventual statehood and urged all Hawaiian citizens to measure up
to their new American heritage,
83
There was reason for Governor bo let a, hidden warning. The
Organic Act contained two provisions which were to have a major
impact upon Hawaiian life. One prohibited the further importation of contract labor and ended the contract system; the other
restored universal manhood suffrage, fiuring the Congressional
debates over the Organic &ct» the leading foreigners in the islands had pleaded for retention of restricted suffrage. The
native uawaiians, they said, x?ere like chiloren and were not yet
prepared for the responsibility of voting. But Congress would
not listen to any abridgement of the ibaerican tradition of universal suffrage : in any part of the United States the vote would
remain open to all citizens. It was not long before this decision
had its repercussions in Hawaiian politics.
One immediate result of annexation was the rapid development
of Hawaii as a United States military stronghold in the Pacific.
The first amy garrison landed four days after the ceremony of
transfer; and by World War I a series of coast artillery forts
protected the Honolulu region, ^chofield Barracks, named for
one of the most enthusiastic advocates of 4meric*n rule, was
established in 1909 and grew into the nation *s largest garrison.
The United States had never ta^.en advantage of its rights
under the reciprocity extension of 1887 to occupy Fearl Harbor,
but in 19U) Congress authorised imp rover-: en t of the channel, and in
1908 development of the harbor as a major naval base was approved.
Work on a large drydock v?as started in 1909; and two years later,
when the first large ship entered the new base, an enthusiastic
local celebration attested that a significant new element had entered
island life.
Qk
Hawaii's peculiar importance as tv.e strategi c control point for
Pacific defense was late r to form the basis of pleas for special
types of administrative control.
The volatil e politica l and ethnic situation which would give
ris e to such pleas became evident soon after the Organic Act became effective. By a stroke of President kcRinley's pen the
natives were once more effectively enfranchised; and they held more
than two-thirds of the votes, since the more numerous alien Orientals were not eligibl e for citizenship. Stil l smarting from their
treatment since the bayonet constitution of 1887, the hawaiians
sprang forward to take control of the government. A home Rule
party was formed with toe blessing of deposed Queen Liiiuokalani;
and the slogan "Hawaii for the Hawaiians" was soon heard again
through the land. At the election held in 1900 the natives
chose Robert *.'• i.ilcox, royalist and leader of the insurrections
*
of 1889 and 1895, as Hawaii's first territorial delegate to Congress;
and they overwneliningly captured the territorial legislature.
As if to taunt the foreign residents, the legislature spent the
129 days of its first session pointlessly wrangling over such
petty measures as a poll tax and a general jail delivery, and
devoted so much time to the repeal of a tax on female dogs that
it was called the "Lady Dog Legislature." Contrary to law, it
conducted many of its sessions in Hawaiian; it failed to vote
necessary appropriations; and it sent a joint resolution to
85
Washington charging Governor Dole with incompetence. The firm
but tolerant support given the Dole administration by Fresicient
Theodore Roosevelt, who succeeded the assassinated RcKinley during
September, 1901, eased the situation somewhat and gave a ray of
hope to the white residents.
It is often said that the irresponsibility shown by the
Hawaiians during the first two years after the Organic Act discredited the Home Rule party; and it is clear that many natives
did experience a change of heart. Yet it undoubtedly was the
superb political skill of a small group of white merchants,
professional men, and missionary descendants which ended the
Hawaiians' short, sweet taste of power. Realizing that they could
not hope to outvote the natives, leaders of the Republican party
persuaded one of the highest ranking alii, Prince Jonah Kuhio
kalanianaole, that it would be to the ultimate benefit of the
Hawaiian people if he would be the Republican candidate for
Congressional delegate and would urge native support for the
Grand Old Party.
The results seemed magical. In the 1902 election Prince Kuhio
was victorious over Wilcox, the Republicans won firm control of
the legislature, and the Home Rule party was hopelessly smashed.
Thereafter the Hawaiians voted for the candidates not party, enabling the Republicans to retain a legislative majority until 1946.
The popular Kuhio was repeatedly reelected until his death in 1922.
As Hawaii's voteless representative to Congress, Prince Kuhio
worked devotedly on behalf of the natives, and he also faithfully
86
pressed measures favorable to Hawaii's economic interests.
Althougn toe planters and Honolulu merchants were pleased to have
the jovial, hospitable chieftain representing them in Washington,
they did not hesitate to bypass him when they felt that direct
contacts with Congress and the administration would be more effective. It was plain to everyone, including Kuhlo, that the
""missionary Party" was firmly back in the political saddle. And,
almost incredibly, this small group of ruling haoles -- whites of
northern European origin — constituted only about five percent of
the total population. Even when linked with the Portuguese>whom
many of the old-time foreign residents long counted as a separate
race, the Qaucasions were outnumbered by Hawaiians and Orientals
by a ratio of four to one.
In the years following annexation it was not only political
power which was concentrated in the hands of the few. This period
was also marked by a growing concentration of economic power.
The vast expansion of the sugar industry which followed the reciprocity treaty required large amounts of capital, much of which
was advanced by the plantation factors in Honolulu, Poorly
managed plantations, or even efficient ones during temporary
periods of depression such as that which struck the industry in
1890, were sometimes forced to turn over stock to the agents in
return for advances. Thus the agencies gradually assumed management and ownership functions in addition to the older ones of
handling purchasing, marketing, labor recruiting, accounting,
shipping, financing, insurance, and 1 any other services.
87
Entire groups of plantations eventually came under common
direction. By 1931 five of the largest agents, known as the "Big
Five," controlled 95.6 percent of Hawaii's sugar production.
These firms were tied together through family connections,
personal friendships, and interlocking directorates; and they
took cormon action through a highly effective industry association established as the Planters' Labor and Supply Company in ICE2
and, after 1895, through the Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association.
This unified control of the Territory's largest industry gave support to the statement of one student that "co-operation, not
1
competition, is the keynote of Hawaii's economy,"
The same central control was rapidly extended to other phases
of island business. The major factors invested sugar profits in
transportation companies, banks, cattle rancites, pineapple plantations, hotels, retail and wholesale stores, public utilities,
insurance agencies, trust companies, and many other types of
concerns. The same sugar interests in 1909 financed the expansion
of the Latson Navigation Company so that it was later able to
obtain a near monopoly of snipping between t..e islands and the
mainland. Inter-is land navigation was already controlled by the
Big Five, "It has been estimated," wrote one historian, "that
some eighty corporation directors all but dominated the economic
2
life of the Islands." rioting that by 1915 the Japanese had footFuchs, Hawaii Ppno, 242.
2Judd, Hawaii, 148*
88
holds in fishing, contracting, quarrying, and other minor enterprises, a sociologist late r remarked that while tuere "were tiny
loopholes in the oligarchy's financial web, "it frequently took
1
perserverence and ingenuity to find themV
In large part, the tight group which controlled the island
econoisy was composed of the same persons who dominated territorial politics. These "elite, " said one recent student, "constituted
an oligarchy which ruled in the broadest sense,"controlling"not
only the forival points of the politica l process, but labor and
2
wealth in the Islands as well. " So complete was this dominion,
so littl e was i t influenced by outside forces, that its existence must be considered the outstanding feature of Hawaiian
history during the forty years following annexation.
From the point of viexj of the ruling group, this control was
for the most part exercised in the best interests of Hawaii and
a i l its people. A strong missionary tradition stil l continued
among its leading families, and there was an active sense of
obligation to the native dawaiians and the imported laborers.
Rectitude, dedication, and benevolence were commonly net attributes among the white kauaajna elite ; but there was littl e
intention of raising the mass of natives and orientals to share
in the politica l anc. economic power. The good of Hawaii, they
believed, required continued control -- arm. a continued supply
of cheap plantation labor. Thus paternalism, particularly toward
1
Fuchs, op. cit. , 24C„
2
Fuchs, op. cit.» 152 •
89
the Hawaiians, was a companion of wealth and influence* "1 have
rarely visited any place where there was as much charity and as
1
little democracy," wrote the journalist Hay Stannard Baker*
Wot without reason have the years from 1900 to 1940 sometimes
been called the period of "benevolent paternalism" or of "semifeudalism*"
One result of integrated control was another rapid expansion
of the plantation economy in the decade and a .xilf following
annexation, ^ugar production nearly doubled between 1901 and
1915; and by the latter year sugar accounted for about 90 percent
of the value of the Territory's total annual agricultural production- Of Hawaii1s approximately 300,000 acres of arable
land, 127,000 were planted to cane in 1900. Thirty-five years
later 235,000 acres were devoted to sugar.
Still more land went into large plantations with the rise of
the pineapple industry* The first satisfactory commercial pineapples were grovm curing the IGCO's, but difficulties with canning
processes kept operations on a relatively small scale. In 1901,
James Dole, a cousin of Governor bole, founded the Hawaiian fineapple Company, and two years later the canning of his first crop
market the beginning of the modern industry. By 1909 about 3,900
acres had been laid out in pineapples, and the raising of this
golden fruit rapidly became Hawaii's "second most important industry."
This expansion of agriculture, combined with certain political
effects of annexation, had marked influence upon the racial composition of Cne population, ./ith Chinese immigration finally ended
i/dams, Hawaii, 56.
90
by the union with the United States in IG9C, the planters were
almost entirely dependent on Japan for additional labor. But
then, in 1907 the "Gentleman's Agreement" cut off this source of
supply. The influential group of whites in the islands who feared
a rising "yellow menace" continued to urge the planters to seek
laborers from Europe. The growers, barred from the abundant Oriental
sources, were now inclined to see the "yellow peril " more clearly
than in the past, and they did recruit about 6,000 Portuguese,
nearly 6,000 Spaniards, about 2,100 Russians, and a scattering of
nationals from other European countries between 1906 and 1913.
But Europe could not supply .either the numbers .or the types
of workers to meet the ever-mounting plantation demands ; and the
growers turned more and more to the Philippine Islands, by then
under timer ican control. In 1900 there were practically no Filipinos in uawaii, by 1910 there were 2,361; and ten years late r there
were 21,000, An important new racia l group had been added to
Hawaii's 'melting pot. "
with most of the arable land devotee to sugar or pineapple
growing, the plantation system became a dor.inant factor in the live s
of a large segment of Iiawaii's population. Nearly al l plantations
were isolated, self-contained xrorlds, tightly controlled by ovmers
and managers. At the turn of the century the majority of the
laborers were employed under the contract system, which, though
greatly ameliorated since its inauguration in 1650, provided for
punishment of workers who left tneir plantations or did not abide
by the terms of their agreements.
91
ill though stern labor discipline was maintained on the plantations, many managers felt a sense of responsibility toward
their employees; and firm control was often combined with paternalism. By 1198, however, paternalistic guidance was seldom
carried as far as it was under the set of rules posted at mohala
Plantation in 1862, which "requested" laborers to attend church
every Sunday and, among other things, prohibited leaving the plantation by day or night without permission, playing cards, quarreling with or whipping wives, and "tittle tattling," There was almost no way in which the workers, individually or collectively,
could protest effectively against such conditions as poor food,
poor housing, or harsh treatment. And managers were more than
reluctant to increase wages or to encourage workers to raise
their economic or social status.
That conditions on the plantations were not always ideal is
demonstrated by the reception given the news that the Organic Act
of 1900 had ended the contract system. The laborers believed that,
suddenly, they were to have more freedom. Japanese plantation workers
staged celebrations, and several hundred on Oahu triumphantly
marched to Honolulu. Improvements in wages and conditions did result, inspired by the fact that workers could now move elsewhere
if they could find a more agreeable employer.
Other advances were slow in coming, but the decade after 1900
saw the beginnings of an organised labor movement among the agricultural laborers. Starting about 1890 or earlier there had been
sporadic and minor disturbances on the -plantations, mostly among
the Japanese, protesting unsatisfactory working conditions, but
92
they generally had been spontaneous and unorganised, about 1905,
however, educated leaders began to appear among the Japanese
laborers, asking such questions as, "Why is a Japanese worker paid
less than otiters for the same kind and amount of vjork?" A strike
at ..alpahu during 1906 demonstrated increased worker organization
and resulted in the granting of minor demands.
In 1906 a Japanese newspaper publisher named Yasutaro Soga
founded in Honolulu the higher .ages Association, "the first
plantation trade-union movement organized in Hawaii." A strike
of about 7,000 Japanese on Oahu plantations followed in 1909, but
it failed. After this disturbance, however, the planters made
noticeable concessions, and paternalistic services and facilities
such as family hospital and medical care for workers, and plantation schools, churches, and playgrounds were expanded. Brutality
of overseers was reduced, and bonuses and profit-sharing were instituted. To many persons it appeared that the Japanese ^nd other
plantation laborers were beginning to make progress in improving
their lot.
Perhaps even more significant advances toward the same general
end were simultaneously occurring in the Territory*s schools.
At the time of annexation Hawaii already had a well-established
system of 140 public schools, and under the republic a progressive educational administration had emphasized "democracy in the
classrooms, the development of student initiative, and the need for
2
more higher education."
Fuchs, 0£. cit., 118.
2Ibid., 265*
93
Secondary grade instruction in the public schools ha-** started
with the opening of Honolulu High school in 1895; and another
major step forward, the establishment of the Honolulu normal and
Training -chool in 1896, had helped ease the demand for more professionally trained teachers,
Oven in 1898 there were grox/ers and industrialists who recognised that an extension of the American system of education in
Hawaii would make impossible the perpetuation of a docile labor
force on the plantations; but the missionary tradition prevailed
among the island rulers, and the educational policies of the
Republic were continued and expanded during the two decades after
1900, In eleven years public and private school enrollment increased from 15,537 to 26,122. lost of these nex* pupils were
Chinese and Japanese, for t-.e Orientals Quickly recognised the
benefits of education and, as the planters feared, saw in it a means
to improve their status. Beginning in 1905 nigh schools were
opened on the outer islands; and a public Joilege of Agriculture
and mechanic Arts, organised in 1907, was later to develop into
the University of Hawaii*
iost of the textbooks and many of the teachers employed in
Hawaiian schools x;ere imported from the mainland. Inevitably the
Oriental pupils absorbed the dynamic political and social ideals
of the American republic, ideals derived from the declaration of
Independence and the Bill of Rights. The concepts that ail men are
created equal and are entitled to equal opportunity to pursue
hap.iness were alien to Oriental thought, and their impact on the
9k
Japanese and Chinese youths of Hawaiian birth was explosive* they
began to areant Oi be in; accepted, not only in politics, economic
life, and government'employment, but in the ranks of the white
wielders ol power and social influence. Both on and off the plantations a revolution was under way.
But this promise for the future was largely a promise for the
Orientals. The native Hawaiians could find little comfort in the
view ahead. On the one hand, the land and economy seemed to be
gripped ever more firmly by the white planners. On the other, the
Japanese and other Asiatic peoples steadily grew in numbers and influence. From 1900 to 1910 the Hawaiian and part•Hawaiian population remained almost static at about 3t,500, while the Japanese
increased from 61,000 to nearly b0,000. It was plain that when
the native-born children of the newcomers reached voting age, the
political power of the Hawaiians would be greatly diminished.
The Hawaiians were keen enough to recognize the situation and
to realize that they were being used to maintain a relatively
small group of whites in a position of dominance. Yet, under the
leadership of I'rince Kuuio, many of them continued to cooperate as
the best means of obtaining any political benefits at all and in
the hope that they could eventually control Hawaiifs political
parties. Their immediate efforts were directed largely towards
increasing their share of the patronage and towards obtaining a
greater portion of the land.
Thus the native Hawaiians strongly supported a move to create
county governments. After a four-year struggle a county act was
95
passed in 1905* The principal responsibilities of government
continued to be centralized in Honolulu, but many new county offices
were created and were largely filled by Hawaiians. In fact, for
many years natives continued to occupy a high percentage of governmental offices, both county and territorial.
With the explosive land problem the natives were less successful. A Land \ct passed under the Republic in 1895 provided means
by which small tracts or homesteads could be acquired by private
individuals from the public lands. By 1910 about 90,000 acres
had been transferred under the homestead provision, "but so far
as real homesreading was concerned, 'a large portion of that might
as well have been cast into the ocean," Host Hawaiians found it
difficult to operate their homesteads as small farms, and for one
reason or another a large percentage of the homesteads was soon
leased to sugar or pineapple growers. Also, many Hawaiians claimed
that the law was administered so as to reserve the best lands for
the sugar planters.
Prince Uuaio shared the prevailing native feeling that the
lands of the Hawaiians had been stolen from them,and much of his
effort in Washington was devoted to an attempt to have the land
laws administered tnor"e liberally and in favor of the original inhabitants. This struggle was largely in vain, and not until the
beginning of the 1920's was the Prince able to push through Congress
his "Hawaiian Rehabilitation Bill," which in theory encouraged homesteading by Hawaiians and part-hawaiians but which in actuality had
*Puchs, oj>. cit., 253.
96
for many years only meager results.
A little more than a century after Cook's momentous landfall,
the remnant of the Hawaiian people felt like strangers in their
own land. Everywhere around them they saw Europeans and Asiatics
pushing ahead, making the soil yield as never before and building Hawaii into a bulwark of power in the Pacific. These newcomers
seemed to be the people of the future. The Hawaiians, their own
culture gone and still unable to adjust completely to the new
standards and new values, often took refuge in dreams of the "old
days" or lost themselves in desperate yearnings for some way to
halt the advance of intruders. "Our cup is bitter," x*rote one
part-Hawaiian legislator in 1910,"but let's fight it to the bitter
end."
The time was still a half century away when a minister of
Chinese-Hawaiian ancestry would stand before his congregation in
the old Stone Church in Honolulu and say with sincerity and
gratitude that with the arrival of the first missionaries, "a
new Hawaii was born," a Hawaii in which the spirit of aloha "is
2
the power that can reunite where quarrel has brought separation."
Fuchs, op. cit., 168.
2Abraham K. Akaka, "Statehood Service at Kawalahao Church,
March 13, 1959." Congress passed the enabling act for Hawaiian
statehood on March 12, 1959, but the Territory did not officially
become the fiftieth state until August 21, 1959.
91
Chapter VIII
"The Loveliest Fleet of Islands"
The sweeping panorama of Hawaiian history from Cook's first
landfall to physical and spiritual enfoldment in theAmerican union
was well recorded by the written word and the artist'.s brush. The
color, the strangeness, and the haunting beauty of the islands, and
the vital, vibrant humanity of the island peoples, have had their
minor effect upon world literature. But, except for recorders of
ancient legends and ways, Hawaii was slow to develop her own
writers and artists of recognized stature. The story of creative
literature and art in Hawaii is, in the main, a narrative set in the
twentieth century, but behind it lay more than 100 years of tradition
and experiment.
The native Hawaiian culture was rich in legends and myths.
Much of this vast bulk of stories was not folklore in the sense of
stemming from unlearned popular tradition. It was literature, unwritten but highly formalized and transferred orally from generation to generation by a special class of bards or storytellers.
Although many of these stories were localized by being placed in
Hawaiian settings, they were a part of the broader Polynesian
spoken literature; and not a few of the same tales are found in
such widely separated places as Hawaii and New Zealand with almost
no variation, even in name.
After the mission schools were established and Hawaiian was
"virtually created" into a written tongue, a small but active band
of native scholars developed. They strove to record and preserve
98
the traditions and stories of their people. One of them, S. K. Haleole,
even attempted to found a new native literature with his narrative
of the ancient romance Laieikawai, published during the 1860's.
But it was a foreigner, Abraham Fornander, who most successfully
stimulated the Hawaiian scholars to record, or to assist in recording,
the old stories; and his vast collection, now in the Bishop Museum,
is an unrivalled storehouse of Polynesian literature. Other writers
and students of Hawaiian culture, including such diverse personalities as King Kalakaua and Thomas G. Thrum, also recorded the ancient
legends before the twentieth century had passed its first decade,
and as a result there exists today a considerable body of native
literature derived from informants who knew the old culture before
it disintegrated* Particularly valuable is Natnaniel B. Emerson,
Unwritten Literature of Hawaii (1909)* Much, however, was forever
lost.
Unfortunately, the effort of Haleole to develop a school of native
Hawaiian writers has not been vigorously continued. Thus, since the
discovery of the islands by Cook, most of Hawaii's literature has
been the product of foreigners.
The earliest writings about Hawaii consisted largely of the accounts of sailors and other travelers who touched the islands. This
long succession of logs, journals, and narratives began with Captain
James Cook himself and has continued to the present day. Many of
these works have the grace of style and the depth of perception to
entitle them to be classed as "literature," but being about Hawaii
and not by Hawaiian residents, they perhaps do not fall in the
99
category of "Hawaiian literature," At any rate, there is much
good reading and a vast amount of information to be found in such
entrancing narratives as James Hunnewell's Journal of the Voyage of
the "Missionary Packet" (i860), William Ellis's A Narrative of a
Tour through Hawaii (1826), and Isabella Bird Bishop's The Hawaiian
Archipelago (187^),
Another class of Hawaiian boohs consists of the reminiscences,
autobiographies, journals, narratives, and biographies of early island
residents, particularly the missionaries and their families. Among
these works, whose number is legion, the cornerstone is Hiram
Bingham's A Residence of Twenty~One Years in the Sandwinh Islands
(18^9), Though ponderous and often unfelicitous in phrase and
organization, it conveys as does no other account the unbending zeal
of those fishers of men who made Hawaii what it is today. As an
antidote, Laura Fish Judd's Honolulut Sketches of the Life, Social,
Political, and Religious, in the Hawaiian Islands from I828 to l86l
(1880) fairly sings with its humanity and flashes of vivid description.
The penchant of island residents for narrative writing was also
reflected in the early development of an active school of historians.
After their first attempts to stifle the "heathen" culture of old
Hawaii, the missionaries began to become interested in it and believed it could be used to serve "higher" ends, Sheldon Dibble, a
teacher at the mission seminary at Lahainaluna, was one of the first
to recognize the need to preserve knowledge of the native culture.
Beginning in I836 he systematically began to collect facts about
Hawaiian history and customs, using his pupils to gather information
100
from qualified informants. The result was Ka Moolelo Hawaii, a
history of the islands written by the high school students and
printed in the Hawaiian language.
During I838 and 1839 the Reverend Mr. Dibble visited the United
States and gave a series of lectures on Hawaii. Before returning to
the islands he published his talios under the title, History and General
Views of the Sandwich Islands' Mission. Apparently it was the first
separate comprehensive sketch of Hawaiian history to appear in English.
In l84l Hawaii's first historical society was formed at Lahaina
to collect the historical and ethnographic knowledge which was then
fast being forgotten. Although the organization survived only three
years, it served a valuable purpose. Through participation in its
activities, Samuel M. Kamakau determined to record the story and traditions of his people. Kamakau's valuable manuscript, Ruling Chiefs
of Hawaii, was finally translated and was published in I961. Other
native historians who were active during this early period were
John Papa I'i and David Malo. Their important works, 1*1
 fs Fragments
of Hawaiian History and Malo's Hawaiian Antiquities have also been
translated and printed in recent years.
Encouraged by his fellow missionaries, Sheldon Dibble prepared
a more ambitious work after his return to the islands In 1840, His
A History of the Sandwich Islands was printed at Lahainaluna in 184-3.
As might be expected, this useful book expresses the missionary viewpoint and is largely devoted to a detailed account of the development
of the Hawaiian Mission,
The same promissionary bias marked another history which was
101
published in Boston during the same year, James Jackson Jarvesfs
History of the Hawaiian or Sandvich Islands was based upon materials
collected during a stay of nearly four years in Hawaii and upon
extensive research and interviews with early traders. Thus, despite its author*s missionary sympathies, this lively, well
balanced work has maintained its reputation for reliability and is
with some justice called the "first history of the islands,"1
Other ably written general histories appeared during the remainder
of the nineteenth century. Still valuable are w*. D. Alexander's
A Brief History of the Hawaiian People (1891) and his History of
the Later Years of the Hawaiian Monarchy (1896). Many important
historical articles also appeared, particularly in the publications
of the Hawaiian Historical Society and in Thomas G. Thrum's The
Hawaiian Almanac and Annual. But, in general, the preparation of
detailed, impartial histories by trained historians working from
source materials gathered from the far-flung archives of the world,
had ho await the coming of the next century.
In contrast to the early blossoming of narrative writing, the
development of creative literature in the islands was a slow process. James Jackson Jarves, journalist, historian, and scion of the
family which manufactured Sandwich glass, wrote a "kind of novel"
about legendary Spanish castaways in the Hawaiian chain. Recognized as "the first novel with a Hawaiian setting," it appeared
serially in the Honolulu Polynesian during l8hl and was published in
book form in 1857 under the title, Kiana: A Tradition of Hawaii.
' «., " •!'< ' J' ifnt'i.-f'-i'i-innli. , '
Steegnuller, The Two Lives of James Jackson .Jarves, 63.
102
It was such a feeble effort, however,, that not even King Kamehameha
IV, to whom it was dedicated, ventured to comment upon its literary
merits, Jarves also produced a partly fintionalized autobiography,
Why and What Am I? (1857), which describes "the extraordinary intermixture of civilization and barbarism" which existed in Honolulu
during the late 1830's- and early l8Uo's. Other Hawaiian novels and
stories appeared, but fiction in Hawaii did not reach its stride
until after the turn of the century.
While Hawaii lagged in developing its own creative writers, the
islands made an impression upon the literature of the United States
and, to a lesser degree, of the world. The first important American
novelist to visit Hawaii was Herman Melville, who spent a few months
of 184-3 at lahaina and as a clerk and part-time pin boy in a Honolulu
bowling alley before shipping out as a seaman on the frigate United
States. Melville's unfavorable impression of the Honolulu missionaries, as expressed in his novel, Typee (1846), caused parts of his
book to be branded as "traducers of missions" by the Christian Parlor
Magazine of New York; but otherwise his brief and unrewarding stay
in the islands had few discernable major results in his writing.
The case with Mark Twain was entirely different. He arrived in
Honolulu in 1866 as a fledgling correspondent of the Sacramento
Union. The series of letters, sometimes humorous, sometimes serious,
which he sent back to California describing his leisurely rambles
on Oahu, Maui, and Hawaii were widely copied, and their favorable
reception encouraged him to believe that he could earn his living by
his pen. They formed his "first sustained writing of any kind" and
103
provided a sizable block of material for Roughing It (1872), The
Sandwich Island tour led directly to the travels which resulted in
Innocents Abroad and consequent fame.
Perhaps of more immediate importance, the lectures on Hawaii
which Twain gave upon his return to San Francisco were a decided
financial success and launched him on a platform career which was
long his chief source of income. As one contemporary reporter wrote,
"Mark Twain has put the tiny, remote monarchy on the map --in fair
exchange, the Islands have put Mark Twain on the map, too — the map
of literary America,"1 His phrase, "The loveliest fleet of islands
that lies anchored in any ocean," has become the classic description
of Hawaii.
Charles Warren Stoddard, once a popular American writer, painted
gloving pictures of Hawaii in his delicately written series of sketches,
South-Sea Idyls (1&73) and in other works. His powerful and moving
The Lepers of Molokai (1885) was the "first book on the Hawaiian
leper colony, and the first to bring the life and accomplishments
2
of Father Damien to general notice,"
Stoddard influenced Robert Louis Stevenson to visit the Pacific
Islands, and the Scotch author spent the period from January to June,
1889, in Hawaii. There he completed The Master of Ballantrae,
finished reworking The Wrong Box, got the idea for The Wrecker,
Genie Pitchford, "Mark Twain in Hawaii," in Paradise of the
Pacific, vol. 73, no. 8 (holiday edition, 1962), 35-36.
2
Charles Warren Stoddard, Diary of a Visit to Molokai in 1884,
with • . • introduction by Oscar Lewis (San Francisco, 1933),
 v i104
started or perhaps even completed "The Bottle Imp," a story largely
inspired by a visit to the Kona Coast of Hawaii, and wrote several
short stories. As a result of a visit to the leper colony at
Kalaupapa he later issued a spirited defense of Father Damien. The
vivid impressions of cultural conflict which Stevenson observed in
Hawaii and on other Pacific islands were to find expression in many
of his writings. At Molokai, "he abandoned once and for all the
theory of the noble savage and began instead to take spiritual sound*
ings in the depths of his soul."1
Stevenson made a second visit to Hawaii during 1893, but then his
remaining months of life were few. Beyond two or three short poems
and a note of recommendation in the Sans Souci Hotel register, this
brief sojourn in the Honolulu of the Republic brought little addition
to the corpus of his work and had no major influence upon his literary
stature *
In 1907 Jack London and his wife Charmian reached Honolulu in
their ketch the Snark. The four months they spent at Waikiki and in
strenuously hiking or riding donkeys over much of the islands were
to have important literary results, while in Honolulu London wrote
a good portion of Martin. Eden, the autobiographical novel which, by
some, is considered one of the finest ever produced in America. A
visit to Kalaupapa led him to write "The Lepers of Molokai," a factual
article which went far to counteract the popular impression that the
leper colony was a place of horror. Several short stories, including
the famous "Koolau the Leper," preserve vivid pictures of island life.
Martha Mary McGaw, Stevenson in Hawaii (Honolulu, 1950), 136.
105
A longer visit to Honolulu during 191$ was less important from a
literary standpoint, London's fascination with Hawaii is reflected
in his books, The Cruise of the "Snark," The House of Pride, and
On the Makaloa Mat,
The Hawaiian Islands were the scene of several notable landmarks
in the history of printing and journalism. The battered, second-hand
Ramage press set up on Honolulu by the pioneer band of missionaries
began operation on January 7, 1822, producing "the first sheet ever
printed in the North Pacific region." About a decade later the press
at the mission seminary at Lahainaluna, on Maui, began to issue
"diminutive pious sheets" in the native language called newspapers.
Thus the appearance of the first of these productions, Ka Lama Hawaii,
or Hawaiian Luminary, on February 14, 1834, is sometimes heralded
as the birth of the first American newspaper printed west of the
Rockies.
But the first secular newspaper and the first worthy of the name
was the weekly Sandwich Island Gazette and Journal of Commerce,
"crudely issued by a local American merchant and his printer assistant." First appearing during July, 1836, this "first newspaper
printed in English west of the Rocky Mountains," expired three years
later, to be followed by a series of papers, the Polynesian and the
Friend among others, now indispensible to historians writing of the
Pacific area.
1Day, Hawaii, 97.
Steegmuller, op. cit., 46.
106
In January, 1838, the Sandwich Island Institute, a cultural
organization devoted to "the intellectual improvement of its members"
and to gathering information concerning the Pacific, began publication of the Hawaiian Spectator, "the first quarterly review published
in the Pacific Ocean." Unfortunately, this valuable periodical set
another precedent by printing an intemperate article which caused the
withdrawal of its financial support, and it was discontinued during
its second year.
The native arts of ancient Hawaii quickly succumbed under the impact of Western ways, and it was long before the islands saw a
reawakening of art within the new culture. Many early travelers
and visitors were skillful artists, and the islands thus have a
rich heritage of drawings, paintings, and sketches dating back to
the first landing of Captain Cook. The portraits and views made
by John Webber of the Cook expedition and by Louis Choris of the
von Kotzebue expedition (1816-17) are outstanding works of art by
any standards. And a few early Hawaiian residents were reasonably
competent amateur artists. The early oil paintings of Edward Bailey,
for instance, have the charm of folk art and at the same time preserve remarkabley informative views of Maui during missionary times.
Students at the Lahainaluna Seminary produced a number of creditable copper engravings, mostly based on drawings by missionaries
and members of their families.
But it was not until a century after the discovery that the first
professional artist opened a studio in Honolulu. He was William Cogswell,
^teegmuller, op. cit.j 37
10?
a portrait painter. Although scarcely ranking as a first rate
artist, he preserved the likenesses of prominent personages during
the last decades of the monarchy,
Cogswell and several other artists who worked at about the same
time were responsible for a revival of art in the islands, and
during the l880's "quite a miniature art renaissance" began to
flower. Joseph D. Strong arrived from San Francisco with a commission to paint Hawaiian scenes for the Spreckels interests.
King Kalakaua became interested in his work, and he remained to do
both portraits and landscapes. He was followed in l880by the Boston
artist, Charles Furneaux, a landscapist who won local approbation
for his views of the Mauna loa eruption of 1880-1881. He maintained
a studio for painting and teaching in the Aliiolani Hale and there
exhibited his volcano pictures during August, l88l.
Three years later the French landscape painter, Jules Tavernier,
arrived from San Francisco. He has been described as "the first
painter of real caliber to come to Hawaii." He became famous for
his scenes of Kilauea Crater and founded a school of volcano painting. Among his numerous pupils was island-born D. Howard Hitchcock.
After additional instruction in Europe, Hitchcock returned to become
"Hawaii's dean of landscape painters." Another contributor to the
"little Renaissance" was the young English sculptor, Allen Hutchinson.
He won attention in 1889 with his bust of King Kalakaua, and his
later works included likenesses of President Dole and Robert Louis
Stevenson, the latter being the only known bust of the Scottish author
to be modeled from life.
Kenneth Kingrey, "Art in Hawaii," in Faradjse of the Pacific,vol.73,
no. 8 (holiday edition, 1962), 59-60.
108
3UGGL:;T:;D EUVIDIHG
For the person wishing a concise , overal l view of Hawaiian
histor y ther e are severa l excellen t one-volume orks available . Among them th e following *nre al l ac urate , readable ,
andj in varying degrees, up-to-date : '-«. Grove Any, Hawaii
and Its People (i.ew dork , 1955) ; Halph •. Ruykencall and
.•i« Grove Gay, Hawaii : A History front Polynesian ^ingdora to
Ame r i c an Jor;m.o owe a 1t h (dew York, 1*48). and Gerrit P. Judd IV,
Hawaii, An Informal histor y (new York, 1961). Older, but stil l
useful, is ••• D. .Alexander, A Brief -sketch of the hav/aiian People
(Hew York, 1891).
For an understanding of the histor y of the Hawaiian
people before Cook's discovery in 1778 and for about a half
century thereafter, the following classi c tjorks, writte n by
Hawaiians from the Hawaiian viewpoint, are indispensable :
John Papa Ii , Fragments of Hawaiian History, tr . by hary
Kawena lukul ; ed . by Dorothy B. Darrere (Honolulu) 1959);
bannuel 1-• Kamakau, Ruling Jhiefs of Hawaii (Honolulu, 1961)}
and David Lalo, Hawaiian Antiquitie s (2nd ed. , 1951).
The definitiv e aistor y of the Hawaiian kingdom, xjhich
wil l be supplemented but probably never supplanted, is under
preparatio n by Dr. Ralph G. kuykendall. I t is based upon a
mountain of source materials drawn from the archive s of the
world*
3f9
Two volumes, The aawaiion Kingdom, 177G-1C54: Foundation and
Transformation (Honolulu, 193 C, 1957) and The Hawaiian Kingdom,
1857-1874: Twenty Critical years (Honolulu, 1953), have been
published; the third and last is in process, filling the gap until
the latter volume appears and of permanent value because of the important first-uand material it contains, is .:, D. Alexander, History
of Later years of the Hawaiian honarchy and the Revolution of 1893
(Honolulu, 1896),
There is as yet no detailed scholarly survey of Hawaiian history
from the end of the monarchy to about the beginning of the first World
war, but there are several volumes which make overall studies of segments of this period. William /.dam Russ, Jr., The nawaiian Revo 1 ution
(1893-94) (Selinsgrove, Pa., 1959), is largely a political history of
the overthrow of the kingdom and coversm uch ground explored by earlier
writers; his The Hawaiian Republic (1894-98) and Its Struggle to WWn
Annexation (Selinsgrove, Pa., 1961) deals with many topics not previously treated in detail by scholarly writers; both are important
studies. Although mainly constitutional and institutional in scope,
Robert i . -J. Littler, The Governance of Hawaii: A Study of Territorial
AgmlnisEraEioti (Stanford University, 1929), contains historical material.
110
what is perhaps the dominant theme in Hawaiian History sinc e a t
least 1820 -- the growth of American influence and the increasing
closeness of relation s between the island s and the United State s --
has been well treate d by a number of excellen t books. The outstanding surveys ar e Harold I/. Bradley, The Araerican Frontie r In Hawaii:
The Pioneers, 1789-1843 (Stanford University, 1942); and Sylveste r
K. sevens, American Expansion in Hawaii,^1842-1C9S (Harrisburg, Pa. ,
1945). Another well-writte n and informative summary is found in
chapters IX-XI of foste r Rhea ^ulles, America in the Pacific , A
Century of Expansion (Boston, 1932). Juliu s J. Pratt , Expansionists
of 1898 : The Acquisition of Hawaii and the Spanish Islands (Baltimore ,
1936) ; C. C, Tansill , Diplomatic Relation s between the United State s
and Hawaii (Fordham University Historica l Series, Ho. 1, hew York,
1940) » and Jean Ingram Brookes, Internationa l Rivalry in the Pacifi c
Islands, 1800-1875 (Berkeley, 1941) cover specia l phases of the topic .
Francis John Hal ford, 9 Doctors & God (Honolulu, 1954), is an illuminating study of the work of the missionary physicians.
Of the many autobiographica l works which pictur e the founding
and growth of the American missions, Hiram Bingham's often "awkward
and unlovely" A Residence of Twenty-One Years in the Sandwich Islands
. . . (Hew York, 1847) is basic . Lemoirs also illuminat e the storie s
of the revolution of 1S93 and annexation to the United States.
Useful in this regard , if read with caution are Sanford B. Dole,
111
Memoirs of the Hawaiian Revolution (Honolulu, 1936); Lorrln A.
Thurston, Memoirs of the Hawaiian Revolution (Honolulu, 1936) ;
and Liliuokalani ^ reportedl y ghost-writte n Hawaiifes 3tory by
Hawaii's Queen (Boston, 1698).
Particula r phases of Hawaiian development have received intensive treatment. Theodore Morgan, Hawaii : A Century of
Economic Change, 1771-1676 (Pair-bridge, Mass. 1948), is an able
summary of early island economic history , while specia l aspects
of the subjec t are covered bu A. C. Alexander, Koloa Plantation ,
1635-1935 (Honolulu, 1937); J. .:. Vaadercook, King Cane, The Story
of Sugar in uawaii (hew "fork, 1939; Jean. :;obbs, Hawaii, A Pageant
of the Soil (Stanford University , 1935); L. A . Henke, A Survey of
Livestock in Hawaii (uonolulu, 1929) ; and Perry P. Phillipp ,
Diversified Agricultur e of Hawaii (Honolulu, 1953). Jon J. Chinen,
The Great J auele (Honolulu, 1958), covers an important subject
briefl y and clearly .
The sociologica l histor y of Hawaii has received considerable
attention . The tos t recent stuay , Lawrence H. Fuchs, Hawaii Pono;
A ^ocia l History (dew York, 1961), is a hard-hitting , readabl e
analysis of th e sociologica l and politica l development of Hawaii,
with emphasis o n the period afte r annexation; although i t has been
criticize d as containing errors of fac t and interpretation , i t must
be considered as an important *r.d suggestive antidot e to the conventiona l interpretations. Other useful studie s are Romanzo Adams,
112
The feoples of nawaii (Honolulu, 1933); .', F. Blackman, The Taking
of Hawaii : A otudy in --ocial Evolution (Hew York, 1899) ; Hilary
Conroy, The Japanese Frontier in Hawaii, lc6S-169C (Berkeley, 1953);
B, G. burrows, Hawaiian truer leans, An -iccount of the ling ling of . .
« Cultures (Hew Haven, Conn,, 1947); n. '..'. Bind, An Island Community:
Bcological success ion in Hawaii (Chicago, 1938); Kathleen Dickerson
Lellen, In a aawaiian Valley (new York, 1947) ; Ldward Horbeck,
Pineapple Town ; Hawaii (Berkeley, 1959); B, K. Wakukawa, A History
of the Japanese People in Hawaii (Honolulu, 1938), In the important
field of education, B. 0. ..est, A Century of education in Hawaii,
1840-1940 (Honolulu, 1940), is the best survey.
l-i o adequate feeling for Hawaiian history can be gained without
reading a selection of the many travel narratives, biographies,
and autobiographies of island visitors and residents. Among the
numerous informative and intriguing travel accounts are "Gilliam
ullis, A Journal of a Tour around Hawaii (Boston, 1G25) ; and Henry
T. Cheever, Life in the -andwich Islands (Hew York, 1856).
Alfons L. horn (ed.)> The Victorian Visitors : An Account of the
Hawaiian Kingdom, 1601-1866, contains letters and diaries which
refreshingly illuminate the mid-century monarchy. A vivid picture
of life on one of the outer islands early in the twentieth century
is given in Armine von Tempski, Born in Paradise (Hew York, 1940).
113
Among many good biographie s and .autobiographies are Hthel L. Damon,
Pa the r^ bond o f ho 11a la (Honolulu, 1927); Lthel 1... Damon, San ford
Ballard Dole and ais Hawaii CZalo **lto, Calif. 1957); Gerrit L. Judd IV,
Dr. Judd, Hawaii's Friend (Honolulu, 1960) ; and Lucy G. Thurston,
Life and Times of irs . Lucy G. Thurston (3rd ed. , Honolulu, 1934).
114
Bart II
SURVEY OF SITES AND BUILDINGS
General Discussion
Viewed from an overall standpoint, the historical preservation
picture in Hawaii is encouraging* For many years, under the Territorial Government, Hawaii has been aware of the values, both educational and economic, of historic sites and has endeavored to protect
and call attention to them by protective legislation, by a program
of identifying and marking sites, and by actual public ownership and
restoration* These measures are being continued and implemented under
the State Government* Through the combined efforts of the Federal
Government, the State, the counties, and private organizations and
individuals, a large number of the principal historic sites in the
islands are being preserved and are accessible to the public*
As far as historic sites legislation is concerned, Hawaii is as
advanced as most other states of the Union* An Antiquities Act
protects historic and prehistoric remains, objects, and monuments on
State-owned lands, and there is provision for limiting excavations
and archeological investigations upon such lands to qualified institutions. The Governor is authorized, with the approval of the Senate,
to establish historical landmarks and historic sites upon State-owned
lands, and he may accept gifts of laud for such purposes. The authority
to locate, identify., preserve, and administer State-owned historic
sites is vested in the State Department of Land and Natural Resources.
115
No public construction—whether by State, county, city, or any
government agency—which would damage recognized historic or prehistoric sites can be commenced without the approval of the State
Department of Land and Natural Resources or of the Governor, Zoning
ordnances for the protection of historic districts have been recognized
in at least one county*
In a report issued in January, I962, an Advisory Committee on Marking
Historical Sites, established to assist the State Department of Economic
Development to prepare a program for a State-wide system of marking
historic sites, recommended that such a program be established under
the Division of State Barks, This program is now in the process of
establishment, and in operating it the Director of Land and Natural
Resources will be assisted by a permanent Advisory Cammittee on Marking Historical Sites,
The actual preservation and administration of historic sites on
State-owned lands is somewhat more complicated, however, than is indicated by the existing legislation. The State Division of Parks, an
agency within the Department of Land and Natural Resources, actually
administers only one State Historic Site, as such. It is the Ulu Po
Heiau, at Kailua, Island of Oahu, But the Governor has recently
issued executive orders to establish other official State Historic
Sites so as to permit the Parks Division to manage certain existing
historic remains and sites on State-owned lands hitherto administered
by other divisions of the State Government. Also, there are a
number of historic sites and structures within existing State parks
116
which are not officially designated and operated as State Historic
Sites.
Several very Important historic sites are located on what are termed
"unappropriated State lands," tracts owned by the State but not specifically set aside for park, forest reserve, or other specific uses.
Such sites are managed by the Division of Land Management, another
agency of the Department of Land and Natural Resources. The significant
Hlkiau Heiau at Napoopoo and a email part of the Kamakahonu site at
Kailua, both on the Island of Hawaii, are located on such unappropriated
lands.
Another agency which administers State-owned historic sites is the
Department of Accounting and General Services. The Division of Central
Services within this department has immediate management of several
highly important sites which come under the classification of public
buildings. The Iolani Palace, the Royal Itosoleum, the Royal Barracks,
and Hulihee Palace are examples of such sites. In the case of the
Iolani Palace and the Royal Miusoleum, the curators and interpretive
services are supervised by the State Archives, another agency of the
Department of Accounting and General Services. At the Hulihee Palace,
the curatorial and interpretive services are under the charge of the
Daughters of Hawaii, a patrotic and cultural organization.
State appropriations for historic preservation have provided positive
evidence of the StateGovernment's recognition of historical values.
Generally such funds have been made available to the Division of State
Parks for expenditure, even at sites which it does not directly administer, such as the Hikiau Heiau. The Legislature has not been
117
consistent in such appropriations, however. During the current year,
for instance, the Division of Parks received $1*0,000 for historic sites
purposes, while $100,000 was appropriated directly to the County of
Maui for restoration work at Lahaina.
Another group of historic sites is being preserved by the individual
counties of Hawaii. Such sites and structures—largely heiaus—are
generally located in county parks. The land on which Queen Emma's
home, Hanalakamalama, stands, is owned by the State, and controlled
by the City and County of Honolulu, though the structure is administered
by the Daughters of Hawaii.
Perhaps even more important than the counties as agencies of
preservation are the combined efforts of private organizations, trusts,
and individuals throughout the State. A number of the most significant
sites in Hawaii are on privately owned land and are being preserved by
their owners. A number of such sites and structures are not open to
the general public, but at others public access is purposely provided.
Among the highly significant sites thus available are the Old Russian
Fort at Waimea, owned by the Robinson Family, and the Puukohola Heiau
near Kawaihae. The Hawaiian Mission Children's Society owns and ad~
ministers a group of highly significant early mission structures in
downtown Honolulu; and descendants of individual missionary families
preserve other sites and sometimes maintain them as public museums.
The Lyman House Memorial Museum in Hilo is a fine example of this
latter type of historical project. Another large and important group
of sites, including the Kawaiahao Church in Honolulu, continue, to
118
operate as active churches. Local historica l societies operate, although they seldom own, other sites, such as the Edward Bailey home a t
Wallului*
Historical preservation in Hawaii, both from the standpoints of obtaining adequate legislation and of actual maintenance, restoration, and
interpretation, has been greatly assisted by a number of civic and historical organizations. The Conservation Council of Hawaii, a private
group, maintains a Sites Committee which was influential in obtaining
legislation for the identifying, narking, and preserving of historical
sites under the Territorial Government, There are active historical
societies on the islands of Oahu, Hawaii, Maui, and Kauai. Several
of these, particularly that on Maui, have been highly effective in
site preservation work. The sources of Hawaiian history, though
scattered throughout the world, are, generally speaking, well-known
and well-preserved. The Archives of Hawaii is one of the outstanding
institutions in this regard, preserving the records of the Hawaiian
Kingdom and the governments since that time. The University of Hawaii
Library contains a vast number of microfilm records from repositories
all over the world. The Bernice P. Bishop Museum, although its interests
largely are concerned with the culture and ethnology of the Hawaiian
people, possesses a number of historical documents and many objects
relating to the period of the monarchy. It maintains a fine library
of Hawaiian books and documents. The Hawaiian Historical Society and
the Hawaiian Mission Children's Society both maintain collections of
books and manuscripts relating to Hawaii, as does the Library of
Hawaii. Probably the largest collection of Hawaiian books is found
119
at the University of Hawaii> which also maintains a union catalog
of holdings in Hawaii.
120
SITES OF EXCEPTIONAL VALUE
COOK LANDING SITE (WAIMEA BEACH)
LOCATION: On the southwestern shore of the Island of
Kauai immediately west of the mouth
of the Waimea River; the most probable exact
site is on the waterfront at the eastern
fringe of the town of Waimea.
OWNERSHIP: About 1 acre is owned by the County of Kauai
and is maintained as a recreational park; the
remainder of the site, about 3 acres of beach
and breakwater, is owned by the State of Hawaii.
Significance
According to the best evidence currently available, the beach
at Waimea was the spot where Captain James Cook, the first European
known to have sighted the Hawaiian Islands, made his initial landing
upon island soil on January 20, I778. In Cook's own judgment, this
discovery of the Hawaiian Islands seemed "in many respects to be the
most important ... made by Europeans throughout ... the Pacific area";
but the perspective of time has not sustained this opinion since the
effect upon the rest of the world was relatively minor. For the
Hawaiian Islands, however, the discovery was momentous. Hitherto,
during centuries of nearly complete isolation, the pattern of Hawaiian
social and cultural life had evolved gradually and primarily from
internal forces. Henceforth, economic and social change was rapid
and was moved primarily by external forces. In a sense, it is true
that, as has been claimed, the American occupation of Hawaii was a
result of this discovery.
While on his way from the Society Islands to the Northwest
Coast of America during his third great voyage of Pacific exploration,
121
as he "leaped" ashore, the natives prostrated themselves as they did
for their own highest chiefs. Friendly relations being established,
he visited the lagoon, determined that the water was good, and returned to his ship* The next morning he went ashore again, this
time making an "excursion" up the valley. He noted the village,
native temples, crops, cultivated trees, and other aspects of
Hawaiian culture, He made one more landing during his stay, but he
soon sailed in the Resolution for Niifaau, leaving Captain Clerke, of
*
n e Discovery* to complete the watering operation. After about two
weeks at waimea and Hiihau, the ships sailed for America. Waimea was
briefly visited again by the ships, after Cook's death, during their
second and final stay in the island group.
In addition to marking the effective discovery of the Hawaiian
Islands, the landing at Waimea was important in other ways. Cook's
observations of the natives and their customs, the first ever recorded,
are of ethnological importance, as are the drawings made by other
members of the expedition. And it may have been at Waimea, although
it probably was on Wiihau, that Cook's sailors, despite every precaution taken by their commander, introduced venereal disease into
the islands. Thus, from nearly the first day of discovery, contact
with Western civilization began its work of disintegrating the
native culture and decimating the native population.
Condition of the Site; A nearby highway bridge, a group of
nearby private homes, and a breakwater along the west riverbank have
altered the historic scene; yet the total effect of the site, if viewe
viewed from the town, is that of a tropical beach. In short, the site
123
Cook Landing Site, approximate location at mouth of Waimea River, Kauai. N. P. S. 1'hotograph. 1962
still has historical impact and appears somewhat as it must have
looked in 1778. About an acre of the site on the riverbank immediately
south of the highway is occupied by a sodded playing field; the remainder iB a sand beach, somewhat disturbed by the stone breakwater
along the river and by excavations resulting from sand removal
operations. (See also photographs following pages 1 and 3-)
References. James Cook and James King, A Voyage to the
Pacific Ocean; Undertaken .. . in the Years, lj76, 1, 8, 9, and 80
{b vols., Perth, Australia, 17^5)J II> 99-159]
i James Cook, The Explorations of Captain James Cook in the Pacific as Told by Selections
of His Own Journals, 1768-1779 (Melbourne, Australia, 1958)> 215-22?;
Samuel M. Kamakau, Ruling Chiefs of Hawaii (Honolulu, 196l), 92-104;
Ralph S. Kuykendall, The Hawaiian KingdomT 1778-1854 (Honolulu, 1957),
12-15, Interview with Mr. Edward K. Robinson, Waimea, April 27, 1962;
Arthur Kitson. Captain James Cook (London, 1907), 417-421.
124
HJUKOHOLA HEIAU
(Heiau of Pu'u Kohola)
Location: This stone temple is located on the top of a
prominent hill, 0.9 nils southeast of Kawaihae,
in the South Kohala District, Island of Hawaii.
More precisely, it is directly south and east
of the Fuako road, 0.15 mile west of its Junction
with the Kawaihae-Waimea Road.
Ownership: The land is owned by the Queen1s Hospital,
Honolulu.
Significance
This ancient temple is perhaps the most famous heiau in all the
islands. It was built, or rebuilt, by Kamehameha the Great and is
closely associated with one of the key incidents in his rise to power
as supreme ruler of all the Hawaiian group. This event, the sacrifice
of a rival king, gave Kamehameha control over the entire island of
Hawaii; it also superbly illustrates the fact that Kamehameha, despite
more than a decade of contact with foreigners, remained true to the
ancient Hawaiian social, political, and religious system. His treatment of his rival was typical of the ruthlessness by which Hawaiian
chiefs sometimes gained power. The impressive appearance of the
temple and the knowledge of the grisly events which occurred there
give this site a high degree of historical "impact" and make it a
highly suitable spot at which to interpret the formation of the Hawaiian
kingdom, an event of outstanding national significance.
The earliest temple known on this site was in existence as early
as the time of Lonoikamakahiki(about 1550) and was even then a place
of human sacrifice. In 1790 Kamehameha, king of the Kohala, Kona, and
fiemkua districts on Hawaii, successfully invaded Maui, Laaai, and
Molokai. During long years of earlier struggle, he had not been able
025
to conquer the other two kingdoms on Hawaii. While on Molokai he
sent an emissary to the famous soothsayer of Kauai, Kapoukahi, to
determine how he could conquer all of the island of Hawaii. He was
told that he must erect a large new heiau at Puukohola, near Kawaihae.
CalM hack to Hawaii by an invasion of Kohala hy his cousin,
Keoua, ruler of Kau and part of Puna, Kamehameha fought more battles
without gaining a decisive victory. Meanwhile, he remembered the
words of the soothsayer and started to erect the heiau near Kawaihae.
So great was the undertaking that workers by the thousands were called
in; even chiefs and Kamehameha himself joined the labor. This "pious
enterprise" was interrupted by an invasion from I^ui and Oahu, but
Kamehameha defeated the attackers in a famous naval battle off Waipio
in the spring of 1791 • T&e heiau was then finished during the summer
of that year. On account says 11 men were sacrificed upon its completion.
Kamehameha then invited his great rival,Keoua, to come to Kawaihae
to make peace. Despite a fear of treachery, Keoua, for some unknown
reason, accepted. As he was about to step ashore from his canoe he was
attacked by one of Kamehameha' B chiefs and killed, along with a
number of his companions. His body was taken up the hill to the new
heiau and sacrificed. His death, in the summer of 1791, ended all
opposition to Kamehameha on Hawaii, and all the island fell to "The
Lonely One." With this accomplishment behind him, he was free, a
few years later, to proceed with the conquest of all the islands and
to found the Hawaiian Kingdom.
126
I'nnkohola lleian. near Kawaihae, Island of Hawaii, where in 1791 kamehameha I sacrificed his chief rival and thereby won
control over the entire island. N P s_ pi,olo((raph. i%2
The incident was a crucial and decisive step in Kamehameha's
rise to supreme power. His treatment of Keoua has never been fully
explained; but, cruel though it was, it led eventually to the founding
of the Hawaiian Kingdom, an event which, in turn, was largely responsible for keeping the islands independent until they were annexed to •
the United States.
Condition of the Site
This native Hawaiian temple, sitting atop a hill about 150 yards
from the Puako road, is an impressive structure. Built of piled stones
and measuring about 224 by 100 feet, it is walled on the ends and on
the landward side, the seaward side being open and terraced. It
commands a superb view of the vest coast of Hawaii and overlooks
Mailekini Heiau, another large temple down the slope a short distance
to the northwest.
The heiau, which has been restored, is in excellent condition
and is open to the public, with walks and steps to provide easy
access. It is marked by a bronze tablet erected by the Territorial
Superintendent of Public Works in 1928.(See also photo following p. 11.)
References: William Ellir, Narrative of a Tour Through
Hawaii (3rd ed., London, 1827); 81-83; Samuel M. Karoakau, Ruling
Chiefs of Hawaii (Honolulu, 1961), 154-158; Ralph S. Kuykendall,
The Hawaiian Kingdom, 1778-185*1 (Honolulu, 1938)*3£-38; Thomas G, Thrum,
"Tales from the Temples - Part II," in The Hawaiian Annual for 1908
(Honolulu, 1907); 64-69.
127
KAMAKAHONU (RESIDENCE OF KAMEHAMEHA I, INCLUDING AHUBNA HEIAU)
Location: On the northwestern edge of Kailu Bay, directly
north and west of the Kaila wharf, in Kailua,
North Kona District, Island of Hawaii,
Ownership: Of the approximately 3,5 acres which can now be
said to embrace this site, about 0,7 acre (0,35-
acre tract at end of wharf and about 0*35 acre
of beach) belongs to the State of Hawaii; another
tract of 0.80^ acre is owned by American Factors,
Ltd,, but is available for donation to the
State under certain conditions; the remaining
approximately 2 acres are owned by American
factors and are leased to Island Holidays Resorts
for hotel purposes, although certain pedestrain
and vehicular rights of way easements would be
available to the State,
Significance
The area known as Kamakahonu, surrounding Kamakahonu Cove,
is beyond dispute one of the most important historic sites in all
the islands. Here Kamehameha the Great spent his last years and instituted some of the most constructive measures of his reign; and here
he died. Here the kapu system and the ancient Hawaiian religion were
officially terminated; and here the first missionaries to reach the
islands made their initial official landing. All of these events were
momentous in Hawaiian history, and all of them had their effect in
eventually bringing Hawaii into the United States, The scene of these
occurrences, though now greatly altered in appearance, is of such
absolute importance that recognition would appear mandatory. And,
there still remain opportunities to restore a reasonable part of the
historic scene.
The most ancient part of the site recorded by tradition is the
Ahuena Heiau, located on a point at the southwestern edge of the cove.
This temple is attributed to the period of King Liloa, about the
beginning of the l6th century. It was visited and described by
128
Kaniakahonu, Kailua, Island of I iawaii; what remains of the site of kamehameha's last home is to the rigln and at both ends of
the curved hotel building in the left center of the aerial photograph. K r s pi,oiour»ph. 1962
Vancouver, at which time it was a heiau of the human sacrifice class.
The area did not enter recorded history in an important
way, however, until King Kamehameha I, having united all the islands,
moved his residence from Honolulu to Kailua in 1812. Evidently after
living nearby for a while, he moved to Kamakahonu, where he built a
house a short distance northwest of Ahuena Heiau. Here, it is said,
he liked to look upward to the farms on the uplands. The stone platform and walls of this house, as it was altered later in Kamehameha's
time, still stand. The king preferred living in a thatched house,
however, so his main residence consisted of several grass-covered
houses elsewhere in the area. There were a number of other structures,
some of stone and some of thatch, within the wall which stretched in
a great crescent from the present wharf northwest, then southwest, to
beyond the king's stone-walled house. Among them were substantial
storehouses.
The king's next step was to restore Ahuena Heiau as his
personal temple. After reconstruction it measured 150 by 120 feet.
It is said that the king held a secret council of bis highest advisers here nightly, and here his son and successor received his
training in statecraft. According to one Hawaiian historian, the
king's "usual occupation in his old age was fishing," but he also
did much constructive work, including promoting agriculture and
trade. His big planting field above Kailua can still be identified.
His death occurred on May 8, 1819, in the stone house near the heiau.
The demise of Kamehameha produced a crisis, since it was not
known if the kingdom could hold together with the passing of its
129
founder. At a formal ceremony held at Kailua a short time after
Kamehameha's death, his eon, Liholiho, was given the title of Kamehameha II, and most of the chiefs assented to an arrangement for
land division. The unity of the kingdom was again confirmed later
in the year when a rebellion was crushed. The next crisis came in
late October or early November, 1819, when Liholiho officially ended
the ancient kapu system by eating with the women of his court at a
public feast. Thi.. event occurred at Kamakahonu, The abolition of
the ancient Hawaiian religion and the destruction of the temples
followed iimediately. The significance of this event in Hawaiian
history cannot be overestimated. The old social order collapsed,
leaving a state of confusion which was not overcome until the general
acceptance of Christianity a decade or two later. The event paved
the way for the influential role assumed by the missionaries in
Hawaiian affairs.
The first missionaries to reach Hawaii came ashore to
begin their work (a few had briefly touched land at Kawaihae a few
days before) on April k, 1820, at a rocky point now covered by the
Kailua wharf. Receiving permission from the king to remain, they
soon separated and established stations at Kailua, Honolulu, and
on Kauai. The missionaries quickly became a dominant force in
Hawaiian religion, social, economic, and political life. Their
influence was important in eventually bringing the islands under
United States rule, and the ideals of education they began were a
large factor in the growth of democracy many years later.
when the royal residence was moved to Lahaina In 1820,
Kamakahonu became the residence of the governor of the Island of
Hawaii, the famous Kuakioi. He converted Ahuena Heiau into a fort.
130
Ruins of Ahuena Heiau, adjoining Kamakahouu, Kailua. Island of Hawaii. N. P. S. Photograph. 1961
Condition of the Site
The present condition of the site, from the standpoint of
the preservation of historical values, can only he described as deplorable. The eastern end of the cove, where the missionaries landed,
is occupied by the large and conspicuous Kailn wharf, with its metal
storage shed. North of this wharf, where several iioportant royal
structures, including possibly that in which the kapu was broken,
once stood are a parking area, hotel driveway, and other buildings.
Except for a strip about 100 feet wide along the still attractive
beach, all the north center of the site is covered by the large
Hotel King Kamehameha. At the southwestern end of the site, the
Ahuena Eeiau has been badly damaged, but the remains of Kamehameha's
stone-walled house where he died still stand, though in poor condition.
However, the situation is not hopeless. The State of
Hawaii already owns a part of the site and hopes to acquire more. If
this plan can be accomplished, a proper restoration could bring back
much of the historic scene, (See also photo following page 13.)
References: Kenneth P. Emory, "Notes and Photographs
Relating to Kamakahonu" (MB folder in Bishop Museum); John Papa II,
Fragments of Hawaiian History (Honolulu, 1959), HO , 117-125, 129;
Kalakaua, The Legends and Myths of Hawaii (New York, 1888). 43I-V38;
Samuel M, Kamakau, Ruling Chiefs of Hawaii (Honolulu, 1961), 210-225;
Henry E. P. Kekahuna and Theodore Kelsey, "Kajnehameha in Kailua,"
in Hilo Tribune, Feb. 28-April 5, 195^* Ralph S. Kuykendall, The
Hawaiian Kingdom, 1778-185^ (Honolulu, I938), 51; Thomas G. Thrum,
"Tales from the Temples - Part II, " in The Hawaiian Annual for 1908
(Honolulu, 1907), 69-70; State of Hawaii, Division of State Parks,
"Ahuena Heiau Monument Development Plan" (drawing, January, i960).
131
RUSSIAN FORT HEAR WAIMEA
Location: The old Russian Fort near Waimea is situated on
the southwestern shore of the Island of Kauai,
on the left bank of the Waimea River at its
mouth. The structure is about 20 to 30 feet
above the river and about 200 yards southwest
of the highway bridge.
Ownership: The fort is on privately owned land (Sinclair
Robinson, et al, and Mrs. Alice Robinson), but
is open to the public and is sporadically maintained by the County of Kauai as a historic site.
Significance
This large stone structure is the most impressive relic
of the keen international rivalry which existed during most of the
19th century between the United States, Great Britain, France,and
Russia for control of the Hawaiian Islands, It was this rivalry which
was largely responsible for the fact that Hawaii remained an independent
nation until 1898, long after most other Pacific Islands had fallen
under foreign domination,. Tt was this independence, in turn, which
made possible the annexation of the islands by the United States in
I898.
Alexander Baranov, governor of the Russian American Company
at Sitka, wished to open trade with the Hawaiian Islands to obtain
food for the Alaska settlements. Beginning in 180T several Russian
ships were sent to test the possibilities of commerce with the natives.
One of these vessels was wrecked at Waimea, Kauai, in 1815; and Baranov sent Br, Georg Anton Scheffer to recover the cargo and, probably,
to open a permanent Russian trading post or to gain a political
foothold. According to one account, the Russian merchants stated,
"the highway to Canton leads through the Hawaiian Islands," and
132
thus they hoped to gain a predominant position there as a step in
controlling the commerce of the north Pacific.
Little is known about Scheffer's early activities in"the
islands. According to one authority, he first attempted to open a
trading establishment and a series of plantations on Oahu, but King
Kamehameha scon expelled him from the island. Scheffer reported that
American merchants, alarmed by the prospect of Russian competition,
had poisoned the king's mind against him. He moved to Kauai, where he
quickly gained an influence over King Kaumualii. During the summer
of l8l6 he induced the ruler of Kauai to sign agreements giving the
Russians extensive trading, economic, and land rights on both Kauai
and Oahu. Most historians believed that his unsuccessful attempt to
establish himself on Oahu followed his understanding with Kaumualii.
At any rate, Scheffer soon concentrated on consolidating
his position with Kaumualii. His aim, evidently, was to induce the
king to declare his independence of Kamehameha and enter under
Russian protection. He first built an earthwork at Hanalei, on the
north shore of Kauai; and, sometime between April and late summer,
1317, he constructed a strong stone fort at Waimea, over which the
Russian flag was flown. The manpower to construct the fort was
supplied by the retainers of King Kaumualii.
The Waimea establishment was extensive. Besides the fort,
which was equipped with guns and quarters for troops, Scheffer had
a factory or trading house, with gardens and houses for a staff of
about 30 families c His plans included the establishment of large
133
cotton plantations in the islands. Evidently the fort was not entirely
finished by the late summer of l8lf, by which time Schefferes highhanded conduct had alienated the Hawaiians. Also, the American merchants, determined to resist his entry into the profitable sandalwood
trade, actively worked against him. Thus, when the Russian reportedly
began preparations to invade Oahu, Kamehameha ordered Kaumualii to
expel him; and by September, loTf, Scheffer was on his way back to
St. Petersburg. By that time the Russian government, due to a turn
in world politics, no longer favored a seizure of the Hawaiian
Islands, if indeed, it had ever sanctioned such a move. The Minister
of Foreign Affairs stated that "the reports received...from Dr. Scheffer
indicate that his rash conduct has already led to some unfortunate
results." The official policy seems to have been one of waiting for a
more propitious moment. The Russian American Company continued to
send ships to Hawaii for a number of years, but their chance for
effective action had been lost.
After Scheffer's departure, the fort was occupied by
Hawaiian troops. Here, during 1820, a 21-gun salute was fired when
the brig Thaddeus arrived with the son of Kaumualii, who had been
attending school in the United States. The first Protestant mission
settlement on Kauai was established on the riverbahk near the fort
in 1820. Upon the death of Kaumualii in Honolulu in 182^, his son
and a few disaffected Kauai chiefs attempted to seize power by a
surprise attack upon the Waimea fort, but they were repulsed after
a bloody fight by loyalist forces under the great chief, Kalanimoku.
13^
Russian Fort near Waimea, Kauai; view inside walls, 1958. N.P.S. Photograph. I95S
The fort was garrisoned until about 1853, and some accounts state
that a few soldiers continued to occupy it for ceremonial occasions
until about i860. The fort was dismantled and the guns sold in 1864.
Condition of the Site
The fort is in the form of "an irregular octagon," about
350 to 400 feet across. Its outer walls, still in good condition, are
of piled stones. They are from 15 to 30 feet thick and about 20 feet
high. Inside the walls are the foundations of the magazine, barracks,
and other structures. On the bank of the river are the remains of a
stone wharf. (See plan of Port, following page 53.)
At the present time (April, I962) the site is covered by a
dense growth of underbrush; but it is occasionally cleared off by the
County of Kauai, and at such times the impressive nature of the ruins
is clearly apparent. The immediate fort grounds are attractively shaded
by Keawe trees. The fort is closely surrounded by sugar cane fields
on the south and east. To the north and west the structure overlooks
the attractive beach and harbor of Waimea.
References: W. D. Alexander, The Proceedings of the Russians
on Kauai, 1814-1816 (Papers of the Hawaiian Historical Society, No. 6)
(Honolulu, 1894); Ethel M. Damon, Koamalu; A Story of Pioneers on Kauai
(2 vols,, Honolulu, 1931)> I* 255-256; A. Grove Day, "Russian Flags 6ver
Hawaii," in The Hawaii Book (Chicago I96I), 85-94; Thelma H, Hadley and
Margaret S. Williams, Kauai, The Garden Island of Hawaii (4th ed., Idhue,
Kauai, 1956), 79-80 (maps); Ralph S.Kuykendall, The Hawaiian Kingdom,
1778-1854 (Hoaolulu, 1957)> 55-60; S, B. Okun, The Russian-American Conpany_
i^x:icanCcuBGdfl.'atf Leartied Stfciette s,Do *c^Cajm^i^ge-y Mass2,. 19'A) 153-1671
A. P. Taylor, "Russia's Ifonument to Intrigue in Hawaii," in Honolulu
Advertiser, January 28, 1923*
135
KAWAIAHAO CHURCH
Location; 957 Punchbowl Street (corner of South King and
Punchbowl Streets) in downtown Honolulu
Ownership; This active Congregational church belongs to its
own congregation, organized as the Kawaiahao Church.
Significance
The historical significance of Kawaiahao Church is indicated
by the fact that it is often called "the Westminister Abbey of Hawaii,"
Outgrowth of the original Mission Church founded in Boston in 1819 and
of the first foreign church on Oahu, it symbolizes the work of the
Protestant missionaries, "one of the motivating forces in the life of
Honolulu and the Islands." As the state church, it was the scene of
many celebrated events—inaugurations, funerals, weddings, thanksgiving
ceremonies—associated with the Hawaiian kingdom. Although not the oldest surviving religious structure in the islands, it, as the church
founded and designed by the Rev. Hiram Bingham, seems to be the most
important and representative church of the Protestant missionary period.
The Kawaiahao Church, the old adobe schoolhouse on its grounds, and the
three nearby "Mission Houses," form a group of structures which seeme
best to illustrate the influence of the American Board missionaries
upon Hawaii.
Its interest in Hawaii aroused by accounts of New England
mariners and by Hawaiian youths who had reached the United States and
been converted to Christianity, the American Board of Commissioners
for Foreign Missions decided in 1819 to expand their work to the
islands. A Hawaiian MLssion Church was organized in Boston during
October, 1Q19, and almost immediately thereafter a missionary party
136
of 17 members under the direction of the Rev. HLiam ELngham and the
Rev. Asa Thurston, set sail in the brig Th&&deus+ The group, less a
contingent dropped off at Kailua, landed at Honolulu on April 19, 1820.
Four days later Mr. Bingham preached the jeirat formal Protestant
sermon in the island. The missionaries 9)1 Oahu were first assigned
land near the Kuuanu Valley, but the king suddenly allotted them
instead a tract on the dusty plain near Honolulu near a spring known
as Kawaiahao^ The "Hawaiian Pilgrims" took up residence there in
thatched houses, a part of one dwelling serving as '%he first foreign
church on Oahu." This meeting room also served as a^chool on week
days, and here was begun the educational work which w^f to make 80 per
cent of the Hawaiian population literate within four decades—a remarkable achievement with far-reaching effects upon the development
of the islands.
The congregation soon outgrew the first room, ent. in 1821
a thatch-reofed, wooden church, 5k by, 22 feet in size, was luilt a
short distance, toward the sea from, the site of.the present church., .
Thir structure was "the first house consecrated for the worship of
God in the Sandwich Islands," It burned in 182^, and Chief KaXanimoku,
-the prime minister of the Hawaiian,, kingdom, ordered another built at
public expense. It stood near the site of the first and was built ..
of wood, measuring 70 "by 25 feet. Upon his return to. Honolulu after
surpressing a rebellion on Kauai, Kalanimoku early in 1825 ordered,
a public ceremony of thanksgiving, held in this chapel. Apparently.
this was the first of a long series of public meetings held at
Kawaiahao Church. Funeral services for. King liholtho and Queen
137, . - •... ... . -,...
who had died in England, were also held in the chapel. To accommodate
increasingly large congregations, which sometimes numbered 3*000, a
large temporary chapel was built in 1825, but it was soon destroyed
by a storm. It was followed by a third meetinghouse, built in 1827*
and by a fourth, erecting in 1828-1829, the last being a high
thatched building, 196 by 63 feet.
In 1833 services in English only began to be held at a building
nearby, and Kawaiahao "became more distinctly a Hawaiian congregation."
A permanent white congregation was formed in I837, and the next year
a second native church was formed.
At the instance of King Kamehameha III, a long-planned stone
church was begun in 1836. The task of constructing a stone building
Ikk feet long and 7$ feet wide was a huge one for the time and place;
and the funds to purchase needed lumber and materials from Boston
were raised by public subscription. During 1837 "the work, of gathering local materials—almost 14,000 coral rocks, timber, and lime—
was started. The corner-stone was laid on June 8, 1839* but Hiram
Bingham, pastor and architect of the new church, was forced by ill
health to leave before the building was completed. It remained for
the Rev. Richard Armstrong to preside over the dedication on July 21,
1842. King Kamehameha I H participated in the ceremony and gave
the church lands to the membership. From its dedication until the
present day Kawaiahao has remained an active church, and it is
still considered "the center of worship for the Hawaiian race."
The structure also served as the scene for a number of important
138
American Protestant Mission School House. Honolulu; built of adobe about 1835. N. P. S. Photograph. 1962
Kawaiahao Church, Honolulu; called the "Westminster Abbey of Hawaii." Courtesy Hawaii Visitors Bureau
The structure also served as the scene for a number of important
state events, and it was for a number of years the place of the annual
meetings of the American Mission. Here in 1843 King Kamehameha III
held a thanksgiving ceremony after the restoration of Hawaiian rule by
Admiral Thomas, on which occasion he is said to have spoken the words
which became Hawaii's motto. The legislative assembly of 1848 was convened in the church. Here Kamehameha IV and King Lunalllo were formally
"inaugurated"; and here met the unfortunate constitutional convention
of 1864. In this building Kamehameha IV married Emma Rooke in I856; and
here lay in state the bodies of Kamehameha III, Queen Emma, Princess
Kaiulani, Queen Liliuokalani, and many other notables of the Hawaiian
kingdom.
The building has had several changes in name. At first called
Stone Church, Honolulu ELrst Church, or the King's Chapel, the name
Kawaiahao church came into formal usage in 1862. The church has been
remodeled somewhat since 1842. About I885 a legacy from Mrs, Eernice
Pauahi Bishop was used to remove the small steeple and add coral stone
to give the s*.ajiare tower Its present height. In 1894 the ceiling was
found to be unsafe due to termite damage; and most of the woodwork was
replaced, with some architectural alterations. Termites again forced
a restoration in 1926, and this time the original galleries were restored, but in steel and concrete instead of wood.
On the church property is the old American Protestant MLssion School
House (q.v.) built of adobeB about 1835. It was renovated about I920 and
leased to the Free Kindergarten and Children's Aid Association, This
handsome but simple structure, with its deeply recessed windows, is
139
is said to house "one of the most beautiful rooms in Honolulu*" It
has recently been relinquished by the Free Kindergarten and is under
church control but presently unused.
The grounds also contain the tomb of King Lunalilo, who preferred
to be buried here rather than in the Eoyal Ifousoleum in Nuuanu Valley,
Condition of the Site:
The Kawaiahao Church, "neoclassical" in style and set in several
acres of garden and cemetery, is one of the handsomest architectural
adornments of downtown Honolulu* Designed by Hiram ©ingham, "it took
the shape of the plain, dignified churches he had known in his homeland,
with nothing but the four columns in front and the wooden steeple (later
altered to stone) to relieve its foursquare boxiness*" With its gray
coral walls and white trim, it is a church straight out of New England.
The church as it now stands after restoration is sound and fireproof* The south side of the building was altered in 192°, by the
addition of an office wing* A large parish house and kitchen of modern
design were added to the office in 19*^0. These additions, being confined to the side of the building not observed by most visitors, do not
greatly detract from the historic scene. The church is still very
active and continues to carry out its historic functions as s religious
center for the Hawaiian people* Services are conducted in both English
and Hawaiian.
References: Ethel M* Damon, The Stone Church at Kawaiahao, 1820-
l jM (Honolulu, 19^5)/ Ralph S. Kuykendall." The Hawaiian Kingdom, 1778-
lcVpft (Honolulu, 1938)/ 220, 338, 3^2, 35k, 413; Ralph S. Kuykendall,
The Hawaiian Kingdom, 1854-1&74 (Honolulu, 1953), 33, 83, 106, 239, 2^5*
Ralph S. Kuykendall and A. Grove Day, Hawaii: A History (New York, 19^5>
250.
Ho
MISSION HOUSES (THE THREE OLD MISSION HOUSES: OLDEST
FRAME HOUSE. FIRST PRINTING HOUSE, CHAMBERLAIN HOUSE).
Location: 553 South King Street (corner of King and
Kawaiahao Streets), in downtown Honolulu
Ownership; The three houses and their spacious grounds are
owned by the Hawaiian Mission Children's Society.
The Society's office and library are in an adjacent building on the property.
Significance
These three buildings, together with the nearby Kawaiahao Church,
form the most important and impressive single physical monument to the
work of the Hawaiian MLssion, sent to Hawaii by the American Board of
Commissioners for Foreign Missions, a Protestant organization supported
by the Congregational, Presbyterian, and several other churches. For
about kO years after 1820 the Protestant missionaries probably were
the most important force in Hawaiian politics, economics, religion,
education, and social customs* The missionaries found the native Hawaiian
culture disintegrating after the abolition of the old kapus and under
the Impact of European technology. They provided a new set of ideals
and standards around which the natives could orient their lives* They
found the native population decimated by European diseases and vices.
They introduced medicine and attempted to regulate morals. They became advisers to royalty and brought law and demoracy into the government to replace feudal autocracy and royal whim, helped keep the islands
free of European entanglements, and strengthened economic and political
ties with the United States. They found the Hawaiians illiterate and
taught most of the population to read and write; they introduced ideals
of universal education which still persist* They attempted to teach
the natives the mechanical techniques of, Western culture and
Xkl
introduced new agricultural methods and crops in the hope of creating
a population of independent freeholders. The total impact of these
efforts was tremendous, and the effects are apparent to this day. Even
after the power of the missionaries was reduced, they and their families
were an important factor in the;groupof foreigners who came to dominate
the economic and political life of the islands.
The center of all this effort was in the Mission Houses in Honolulu,
which in effect were the island headquarters of the Hawaiian Mission.
Here was the source of that driving zeal and idealism which have helped
mold the modern Hawaii. The significance of these structures has been
well stated by Bradford Smith, who wrote in I956: "In the heart of Honolulu, surrounded by a coral wall, the old mission houses still stand—
the old white clapboard house where Bingham lived, the little coral
print shop, the thick-walled coral house Levi Claamberlain built. Past
them streams the modern traffic of a busy city. But they are still
there in the heart of it all. Aid so are Bingham and Richards, and Judd
and Armstrong, and all the rest--forevermore."
The stories of the individual buildings are as follows:
Oldest Frame House. When the first company of missionaries prepared to leave New England for Hawaii in 1819/ a Boston shipping firm
donated an entire frame house, disassembled, to be erected in the islands
"for the comfort of the ladies." There being no room on the first vessel,
the Thaddeus, the house did not reach Honolulu until Chri tmas day, 1020,
by which time the missionaries at that place had spent nearly 8 uncomfortable months in thatched houses. Unloaded from the Tartar, the
house was erected only after some delay, occasioned by the need for
142
Missionary Houses. Honolulu: The Oldest Frame House (left), the First Printing House (center), and the Chamberlain
House (right).
N. P. S. Photograph. 1962
Chamberlain House, Honolulu; erected 1830-1831 as the storehouse for the Hawaiian .Mission property. N ,, s ,.,,otogriph, 1962
obtaining royal permission to erect a house larger than the king's.
The carpenter work was performed by the missionaries themselves.
During August, 1821, the Levi Chamberlain family moved into the one
room then completed. The attached kitchen was not built until 1823/ ••&
and the exterior clapboarding was also a later improvement.
This building was not, as is frequently stated, the first frame
house to be erected in the islands, since several chiefs had bought
similar dwellings from traders, but at the time "it was the most impressive." The house sheltered a number of mission families, including,
until lBkO, that of Hiram Bingham, the firm and stubborn, but able,
leading spirit of the mission during its first 2 decades, "Through
him," it has been said, "the New England mind pressed its qualities so
strongly upon Hawaii that other possibilities came to seem alien."
Lucy Thurston, a missionary wife who was among the first residents
in the house, has left a record of her Joy at being able to move into
a structure which bad doors that could be shut against the ever-present
curious natives. The cheerful wallpaper—pink, with vines of tinselwas the gift of a sea captain and was stuck on with poi.
The house was sold by the mission to the Cooke family in 1851, and
in 1925 it was deeded to the Mission Children's Society. The latest of
several restorations was carried out in 1935,
 a t which time the framework was replaced.
First Printing House. Even before the first missionaries left Boston,
they realized that the success of their work would be largely dependent
upon their being able to spread their religious message through the
printed word. They brought with them on the Thaddeus a battered,
1*3
second-hand Ramage press and a young printer, Elisha Loomis.
Since Loomis was kept busy with carpentry and other duties, it
was January J, 1822, before the first printing was done in a grass
house in Honolulu. This earliest printing in the "North Pacific
region" was a vast impetus to the spread of education among the
Hawaiian people.
In December, 1822, Daniel Chamberlain began construction of a
more permanent print shop. The walls were of coral blocks cut nearby
and cemented with common soil. The small shop, 28 by 17 feet, was
completed in December, 1823, and saw "the genesis of the important
printing industry" of present-day Hawaii. An early product was a
6o-page hymnal; and before the end of 1823 Loomis produced the first
commercial printing product—some blank bills of lading. By about
1828 the printing work of the mission had increased so enormously
that the press was moved to larger quarters across the street. The
coral shop was thereafter used as an adjunct of the frame house and
changed ownership with it.
This Printing House is the oldest surviving structure to be
associated with the Hawaiian Mission press, which exerted such an
important influence upon island history. Largely due to its products,
the Hawaiian people in a remarkably short time came to possess one of
the highest rates of literacy in the world.
The Chamberlain House, Levi Chamberlain, described as a man
who "never demanded as much of others as he asked of himself," came
to Honolulu in I823 as business agent for the mission. It was his
task to store the food, clothing, furniture, and other supplies needed
by all the island stations and to distribute them as requiredGrass houses proved inefficient and costly for warehouse use,
and in 1830 he started to build a two-story, coral-stone structure,
with cellar and attic- When the building was completed in December,
I83I, he moved his family into 3 rooms on the lower floor- The rest
of the house was used to store the mi sion property- The pulley and
door used to raise the boxes and barrels to the second story are
still in place.
Long in ill health, Chamberlain called his family about his bed
one day in 1849 and said to his wife, "Farewell, Very pleasantly
have we lived together for twenty-one years. Now we must separate.
I commit you to the Lord." Then this man, who more than any one
other had kept the fiscal affairs of the mission in good order,
fell asleep and died with "not a wrinkle in his forehead," The
Chamberlain family continued to live in the house and, later, acquired
ownership. It became the property of the MLssion Children's Society
in 1910.
Condition of the Site
The 3 old structures and the approximately one acre of landscaped
grounds upon which they stand are in excellent condition. The First
House has been largely reconstructed of new materials, and concrete
and steel foundations have been provided; but the structure preserves
its original appearance, and many of the "clapboards, doors, windows,
floor and siding boards, cupboards, and shutters" are original. The
First Printing House, except for its metal roof, retains its early
appearance. The Chamberlain House was "completely renovated" in
1^5
1919> tut apparently it was little altered. Thus, except for the
beautifully landscaped grounds which hear little resemblance to the
dusty plain of early mission days, the site maintains its essential
historical integrity.
The structures are open to the public as house museums and as museums
for artifacts associated with the mission history. Outstanding items on
display include the old mission press which printed "some 30,000,000"
pages of English and Hawaiian religious and educational materials; drip
stones used by the missionaries to filter salt from the brackish drinking water; and toys and dolls associated with missionary families. A
recent (1950) concrete building on the grounds houses the valuable
libraries of the Hawaiian Mission Children's Society and the Hawaiian
Historical Society.
References; A Grove Day, Hawaii and Its People (New York, 1955),
72, 78, 97-101; (Hawaiian Mission CMldren's Society), The Three Old
Mission Houses (folder, rev. ed., Honolulu, 1958; Ralph S. Kuykendall,
The Hawaiian"Kingdom, 1778-185k (Honolulu, 1938), passim; "Mission
Houses, Honolulu" (Typewritten, Hawaiian Mission CMldren's Society);
Bradford Smith, Yankee in Paradise (Philadelphia, 1956), 71-75, 29^-295;
Lucy G. Thurston, Life and Times of Mrs. Lucy G. Thurston (Honolulu, 193*0,
63-6k, 2U0.
XkS
UiHAINA
Location: Lehaina is a town on the west coast of the
Island of Maui; it can be reached by automobile
from the Kahului Airport
Ownership: Most of the remaining historic structures and sites
are privately owned (see
 discussions of individual
sites below); but the town square,, the streets,
the waterfront, and certain other key segments of
the scene are publicly owned, largely by the State
of Hawaii and the County of Maui, An interim
county zoning ordnance, adopted August 18, 19^1,
has established an area of approximately four
square blocks as the lahaina Historic District.
Significance
Perhaps no island town so well preserves the atmosphere of a mid19th century Hawaiian seaport as does Lehaina; and thus it seems to be
the key site for illustrating and commemorating one of the broad factors
which resulted in the Americanization of Hawaii and which helped lead
eventually to the annexation of the islands by the United States--the
whaling industry* Prom about I83O to about i860 the semi-annual visits
of the American whaling fleet to Lahaina and other Hawaiian ports constituted the dominant force in island economy, stimulating a diversified
agriculture and a general trade which helped spread Western technology
among the Hawaiian people. Also, the thirsting of thousands of seamen
for liquor and women resulted in annual struggles with the authorities
attempting to enforce the missionary induced "blue laws." a long
campaign which the forces of law and order eventually won, with important
effects upon the social and political conditions in the islands. The
vital and long-continued need of the whalers for bases in the islands
was one of the primary factors bringing Hawaii to the attention of
the United States Government. In addition, Lahaina was "cce royal
14.7
residence and capital during much of the critical period when Hawaii •
was changing from a feudal autocracy to a constitutional monarchy, and
it was associated with many of the key events of that transition.
According to tradition, Lahaina was from time immemorial a favorite
residence of Maui kings and chiefs and a convenient port for interisland travelers, The powerful Kahekili, ruler of all the islands except
Hawaii, lived here until his death in 179^; and Kamehameha the Great
landed here to begin his final conquest of Maui. By that time the port
had become a well-known point of call for trading and exploring vessels,
whose captains found the open roadstead a safe and convenient anchorage.
For a couple of decades after 1812 it was an important shipping point
for the sandalwood trade.
A new era of prominence and activity for Lahaina began in December,
1819, when Kamehameha II moved his residence here for several months.
From then until 18^3 Lehaina was a frequent, though not continuous,
royal residence and capital. In 1819, also, the first American whaling
ships reached the islands, and by 1822 there were 3^ whalers making
Hawaii a base of refreshment. From that time the number increased
rapidly. Although Honolulu was originally the port most favored by
the whalers, Lahaina often surpassed it in the number of recorded
visits, particularly from about 1840 to 1855. Another event which
was to have much effect upon the growth and social structure of Lahaina
was the arrival of the first missionaries in the islands during 1820.
The first missionaries to become established at Lauoaina, the Bev. C. S,
Stewart and the Rev. William Richards, arrived in I823 accompanied by
Queen Mother Keopuolani. These three factors--political prominence,
visiteof whaling ships, and the development of a particularly influential
mission under the protection of some of the most powerful chief6 of the
land, resulted, as one writer has somewhat exuberantly said, in starting Lahaina "off to a historical romp that probably will never be
equalled."
The great event of 1823 was the death of Keopuolani at Lahaina.
Within an hour before "joining the Great Majority" she had been baptized
as a Christian, an occurrence which proved a great stimulus to increasing the influence of the missionaries. King Kaumualii of Kaui was, at
his~ special request, buried beside Keopuolani in 1824, The bodies of
Kamehameha II and his queen were brought back from London in 1825 and
interred at Lahaina until they were later moved to the royal tomb in
Honolulu. When Kamehameha III ascended the throne, he settled upon
Lahaina as his home and seat of government.
Meanwhile, the missionaries were making rapid advances, drawing
thousands of Hawaiians to worship and persuading the chiefs, especially
the able governor of Maui, Chief Hoapili, to institute regulations
against the sale of liquor and against visits to ships by island women.
These restrictions were considered too rigorous by the "sea-bittered"
sailors who swarmed ashore seeking pleasure, and in 1825 the crew of
the English whaler Daniel rioted through the town for three days, twice
threatening the lives of the Rev. Richards and his wife. Two years
later the crew of another English whaler, the John Palmer, actually
fired their cannons at the Richards house to force the release of their
American captain who had been detained by the authorities in an effort
to obtain the return of four "base women" who had been illegally enticed
149
aoo&rd the vessel. These difficulties with unruly seamen lasted as
long as Lahaina remained a whaling port, but the Hawaiians, by controlling liquor and enforcing curfews, maintained the upper hand, and Lahaina
was known as a more orderly port than Honolulu. Even so, one minister
in the later l840's described the town as "one of the breathing-holes
of hell."
Lahaina, as the island capital, was associated with many of the most
important political developments in the kingdom during the reigns of
Kamehameha II and Kamehameha III, Here Kaahumanu, Queen Regent, promulgated the famous laws based on the Ten Commandments.. Here the first
Hawaiian Legislature met in 1840, and the first written constitution was
promulgated at Lahaina during the same year. Since much of this evolution
from feudalism was undertaken upon the advice of the Rev. Mr. Richards,
it perhaps is not too much of an exaggeration to say that Lahaina at
this time was "the cradle of Hawaiian democracy." But after the seizure
of the islands by the British during 184-3, it was decided that the capital
should be at Honolulu, and lahaina was relegated to the position of an
occasional royal residence.
Lahaina was at the height of its prosperity as a whaling port
about 1846, at which time about 400 ships a year visited the town to
replenish their water and supplies. In that year the population at
Lehaina numbered 3>557 persons, of whom 212 were foreigners. There
were IO96 houses, mostly strung out along the kukui-shaded main street,
10 schools, a seamen's chapel, 1 main church with 5 or 6 district
churches, and a number of public buildings. "About 5°0 native families,"
it was reported, "eat at the table in the style of civilization."
150
By 1862 the whaling industry was in a definite and permanent
decline* The effect on Lahaina was marked. Prosperity ended, prices
fell, cattle and crops were a drug on the market, and ship chandleries
and retail stores began to wither. The town subsided to a lower level
of economic importance, and life revolved around the sugar mill, later
known as the Pioneer Mill Company, which Was established about 1860-1861,
and amund several other mi 11a and plantations which sprang up from
time to time in the vicinity. By 1885^ when Charles Warren Stoddard
visited Lahaina, the town was "a charming, drowsy and dreamy village."
(For a general view of Lahaina see photograph following p. 27-)
The principal historic structures and sites still visible include
the following:
1. Baldwin House. This handsome two-story home, built of coral
blocks, with a two-story wing, is located en Front Street at Dickenson
Street; it and the 42360-square-foot lot on which it stands are owned
by the H. P. Baldwin Estate.
The missionaries at Lahaina were given a tract of land for residence
purposes by the local nobility in 1823, and the Rev. William Richards
moved into a two-story stone dwelling (since destroyed) there in 1827.
In I832 Ephriam and Julia Spaulding arrived in Lahaina to join the
mission staff, and in 1834 Spaulding started construction of the main
section and "cook house" of the present Baldwin House adjoining the
Richards dwelling. Completed early in 1835, the house was occupied
by the Spauldlngs until 1836, when they left Lahaina due to poor health.
Be* Dwight Baldwin and his femily moved into the house when the Spauldings
left and occupied it until Dr. Baldwin was transferred to Honolulu in
151
1868 (some sources say the Baldwins lived in the house until 1871)•
During this long occupancy the structure becamse known as the "Baldwin
House."
Dr. Baldwin, in addition to serving as pastor of the Hawaiian church
at Lahaina and, for a time, as seamen's chaplain, was a medical doctor;
and he was government physician for the islands of Maui, Molokai, and
Lanai. It was bis duty to greet visitors to the Lahaina mission and
the nearby Iahainaluna Seminary; and guests were thus frequent. He renovated the structure extensively in iBkf-lQky and added the right wing
as a dispensary and office.
Dr. Baldwin's son, Henry P. Baldwin, was born in this house and
later acquired extensive interests on the Island of Maui. The house
has remained in the Baldwin family to the present time. It served
an important part in Hawaiian social and cultural development when
Mrs. Henry P, Baldwin sponsored a community center there which included
a kindergarten, night-school, circulating library, language school,
and high school. Used until lately as a community center, clinic, and
Girl Scout headquarters, it now (April, 1962) appears to be closed but
is kept in excellent condition. It is one of the oldest and bestpreserved missionary dwellings.
2. Old Spring House. Located 200 feet south of the Baldwin
House and set well back from Front Street at the rear of a later frame
structure, this small stone building is privately owned.
It is said to have been built by the Rev. William Richards in
1823 to enclose a spring to supply water not only for his own dwelling
nearby but for the entire conmiunity and for ships anchored off the
town. According to local tradition, a hand pump here was visited by
152
Baldwin House. Bahama; the mam house (right) was completed in 1835; wing (left) was added by Dr. Dwight Baldwin as a
dispensary about 1847-9. N. r. s. rholograi)h, 196.
i ild Spring House, Lahaina, Maui; built during the 1820's to enclose a spring from which Lahaina families and visiting ships
obtained water. .. ,
-V P. 5. 1'hmograph, I%1
Custom House and Court House, l.aliaina. .Maui, constructed in 1859. X. P. S. Photograph. 1962
Cell Block of Old Prison. Uliain.-i. Maui. 1961. Courtesy Hawai. Visitors Bureau
crews of sailors who "constantly rolled huge casks for water." The
Spring House apparently is thus one of the few remaining physical links
with the whaling era.
3» Court House. This solid, two-story stone building stands on
Wharf Street, in the 1.9^-acre square bounded by Wharf, Hotel, Front,
and Canal Streets; it is owned by the State of Hawaii.
In I858 a violent windstorm damaged the governor's house and the
Hale Piula, the former palace which housed the government offices. A
survey early in that year resulted in a recommendation that a new
building to house the customs offices and courts should be built on the
site of the old stone fort. Funds were appropriated for the "Lahaina
Court and Custom House and Government Offices," and the new building was
reported as nearly complete by December, 1859* la addition to the offices
mentioned above, it contained the governor's office, post office, and
"a room in which to starve the jury into unanimity." The building was
extensively rebuilt in 1925> with a considerable change in its appearance. The basic structure remains, however. Still housing about the.
same types of offices as when it was first erected, it serves as a link
with the days of the kingdom. The Court House Square is famed today
for its banyan tree, planted by the sheriff of Lahaina in I873 and proclaimed today as '.'Hawaii's largest."
k. Old Prison (Hale Faahao). The one-story jailhouse, built of
heavy planks, stands at the corner of Wainee Street and Prison Road
in grounds 0.82 acre in extent surrounded by a high wall of coral blocks.
It is owned by the County of lYhui.
153
In addition to ordinary criminals, the authorities at Lahaina gene
generally had on their hands a number of boisterous seamen who had run
afoul of the law in one way or another during their periods of "refreshment" ashore. During the 1830's and l840's prisoners usually were confined in the fort which stood on the seaward side of the present square.
The most common cause of incarceration was failure to obey the sundown
curfew. Liberty expired with the setting of the sun when, said one vi
visitor during the 1840's, the sailors, drunk or sober, "must be off to
their ships, or into the fort," and he painted a vivid picture of the
reeling seamen hustling along to the shore "caressed and hung upon by
native girls, who flock here in the ship season, from other parts, to
get the ready wages of sin."
In 1851 the fort physician complained that conditions for prisoners
were unhealthful, and evidently as a result construction of a new
prison was started in 1852. The main cell block, built of planks, was
constructed in that year, but the wall around the grounds, built of
coral blocks from the old fort, was not erected until about 1854.
Prisoners performed much of the labor. The original cell house burned
in 1958; and it and the wooden gate house were reconstructed in 1959
and now present a fine appearance. The prison is open to the public
as an historical exhibit.
5. Wainee Church and Cemetery (Waiola Cemetery and Church). The
present church structure (1953) and the old cemetery occupy a tract of
2.45 acres on Wainee Street, between Chapel and Shaw Streets. The property is owned by the Waiola Protestant Church.
154
For several years after the American Board missionaries reached
Lahaina in 1823 > services were held in temporary structures. In 1828
the chiefs,, led by Hoapili, proposed to build a new stone church, and
the present site was selected. The cornerstone was laid on September 14,
1828, for this "first stone meeting-house built at the Islands." Dedicated on March'4, 1832, this large, two-story, galleried Wainee Church
was twice destroyed by Kauaula winds and once, in 1894, by a fire of
incendiary origin. The present church structure was dedicated in 1953/
at which time the name was changed to Waiola.
The adjoining cemetery is said to date from 1823. It contains the
body of Keopuolani, wife of Kamehameha the Great and mother of Kamehameha II and Kamehameha III. She was largely responsible for the
overthrow of the kapu system, and her early interest in Christianity
was of much assistance in the founding of the Protestant missions. She
is said to have been the first convert of the missionaries in the islands.
Other prominent Hawaiian nobles interred here include Governor Hoapili,
King Kaumualii, Princess Nahienaena, Queen Kalakua, and Governess Liliha.
Here, too, is buried the Rev. William Richards, the pioneer missionary
and advisor to the Hawaiian monarchy. Seeing his grave near that of
the nobles, a visitor late in the l840's was constrained to write,
"There they lie in the burying-ground, hard by together, the missionary
teacher and the converted heathen."
6. Hale Aloha, This dilapidated stone building stands behind
the Episcopal Cemetery in about the center of the large block bounded
by Wainee, Hale, and Chapel Streets and Prison Road. It is best reached
from Wainee Street. It stands on a 15900-square-foot tract owned by
155
Hale Aloha Church, Lahaina, completed in 1S5S. N. P. S. Photouraph, 1962
United States Marine Hospital, Lahaina, Maui; erected in 184.3, this stone building is a relic of whaling days.
N. P. S. Photogriph. 1962
Waiola Protestant Church.
The predecessor of this building, known as the Hale Halewai,
or Hale Lai, is sometimes said to have been built as early as 1823;
and it, instead of the Wainee Church, is occasionally claimed as the
first stone church in the islands. At any rate, this "sectional" meetinghouse was in bad condition by l855> add the church voted to rebuild
completely, the walls being "too old fashioned to be tolerated in these
go-ahead days." The present building, called "Hale Aloha," was completed in I858 and was "the largest sectional meetinghouse of its time."
In i860 the government fitted it out for use as an English school. In
1908 it became the parish house for the Wainee Church. The building is
now in ruinous condition.
7. United States Marine Hospital. On the landward side of Front
Street, between Kenui and Baker Streets, about 0.6 mile north of the
Baldwin House (Dickenson St.). It is owned by the Bernice P. Bishop
Estate.
In 1842 Captain John Stetson was appointed first American vice
consular agent in Labaina. Probably it was shortly thereafter that a
marine hospital was established for sick and injured American merchant
seamen. At any rate, Herman Melville noted that one of his shipmates
was discharged from the Achusnet at Lahaina on May 29, 1843, aud died
in the United States Marine Hospital of a "disreputable disease," The
hospital could accommodate about 60 men. In 1865 the structure was
sold to the Episcopal Church and became a school for girls, and during
the 1870*8 it was turned into a vicarage and served as such for more
than 30 years.
The exterior walls of the two-story stone structure have been
covered with shingles, but the front verandahs running the length of
156
both stories still remain, and the building retains its historical
integrity. It is used as a residence and is in fair condition. It is
an Important link with the days of Lahaina1s maritime glory.
8- Roman Catholic Church (Maria Lanakila First Catholic Church.)
At Wainee and Dickenson Streets, this building is still an active
Catholic Church. It and the adjoining cemetery occupy a tract of 3*091
acres.
The first resident Roman Catholic priests arrived at Lahaina on
April 21, 1616. A church was built on the present site that same year,
but it was replaced by a new structure in I858. The present concrete
church, erected in 1927-1928; was built on the same foundation and is
almost a replica of the older frame structure; it is said that the original
ceiling was retained in the new building.
9» Pioneer Hotel. This picturesque frame structure stands on the
corner of Wharf and Hotel Streets; it is (1958) owned by Mr. Alan Freeland and is under lease to the Lahaina Hotel Incorporation.
Built in 1901 and therefore not strictly connected with Lehaina's
most 'Significant era, this well-known hotel is nevertheless a key
part of the Lehaina scene. The description of the hotel in one guide
book—"a large box of a building. . . with a wide balcony and decorative
wooden railing"--may be accurate, but it fails to convey the tropical
atmosphere of Lahaina1s first hotel.
Condition of the Site: Lahaina today is a quiet plantation town
which is beginning to stir with new life as recent harbor developments
bring additional recreational and commercial boating activity and as
nearby newly built resorts increase tourist visits. Despite the fact
157
Pioneer Hotel, Lahaina, constructed in 1901. Courtesy Hawaii Visitor-. Bureau
that surviving historic structures are relatively few, the town preserves
much of the atmosphere of a Hawaiian native village and of a mid-19th
century island port. The magnificent natural setting, with its backdrop
of purple mountains and foreground of blue sea, remains unspoiled; and
palms and other trees shade the streets and homes as they did in missionary days. However, paved streets, curbs, new buildings in contemporary
architectural styles, and other developments are cumulatively making
their effects felt and causing the historic scene to fade.
Recognizing the economic and cultural benefits of the town's
historic heritage, the County of Maui and a cooperating organization,
the Lahaina Restoration Committee, have obtained by contract from a
planning firm a study of the historical values and a program for restoration. The proposal, presented early in 19^1, called for a restoration
district which covers 31*79 acres, including all of the principal historic
sites except the Marine Hospital. On August 18, 1961, the county adopted
an interim zoning ordinance which set aside about 8 l/k acres as the
Lahaina Historic District. Within this area are the' Court House, Pioneer
Hotel, Baldwin House, and the Spring House.
References: Mary Charlotte Alexander, Dr. Baldwin of Lahaina
(Berkeley, Calif., 1953); Community Planning, Inc., Proposal for the
Historical Restoration and Preservation of Lahaina . . . (Honolulu, May,
1961); Maui Historical Society, "Historical Sites of West Maui" (mimeographed, (n.p.), May 20, 1958); Maui Historical Society, Lahaina Historical
Guide (Honolulu, (n.d.); State of Hawaii, Commission on Historical Sites,
Mrs. Beatrice Savage, compiler, "Historical Sites on Maui which Should
Be Preserved" (typewritten, February 1, i960); Albert Pierce Taylor,
"Lahaina: the Versailles of Old Hawaii," in Thirty-Seventh Annual Report
of the Hawaiian Historical Society • . . 1928 (Honolulu, 1929)/ 3^-68.
158
OLD SUGAR MILL (KOLOA SUGAR PLANTATION, LAPP & COMPANY'S MILL)
Location: Ahout 60 yards west of Maluhia Koad, at
the northern entrance to the town of Koloa,
Island of Kauai,
Ownership: Grove Farm Comptty Ltd., Puhi, Kauai.
Significance:
The Ladd & Company sugar plantation, established at Koloa in 1835,
was "the first successful Hawaiian sugar plantation." Its creation and
its subsequent success marked the "real foundation" of what is now
Hawaii's largest industry. Since sugar long played a major role in
Hawaiian economics and politics and perhaps was the dominant force in
bringing about the annexation of the islands to the United States, this
site is of major national significance.
The origins of the sugar industry in the Hawaiian Islands are
shrouded in uncertainty. Captain Cook found sugar cane being grown by
the natives when he discovered the islands in 1778, although there were
no plantations as presently understood. Foreigners quickly realized
that the climate and soil were well suited for the growing of sugar,
and small-scale planting began at an early date. According to tradition,
an unidentified Chinese brought a crude stone mill and boilers to Lanai
ahout 1802 and ground one small crop before returning to China the
next year. He may have been the first to manufacture sugar in Hawaii.
In l8ll there is a record that Kamehameha I had a cane mill and boiler,
and it is known that the early Spanish resident, Don Franjclseodfilaulai^arin
was engaged in making sugar in 1819» Several other early sugar manufacturers are named during the early 1820's, but all of these efforts
were on a small scale and were more or less experimental*
159
In 1825 a tubercular Englishman named John Wilkinson planted
sugar in Manoa Valley behind Honolulu, and before his death 2 years later
he had about 100 acres under cultivation. This effort is generally considered to be the first sugar plantation in the islands, but it was not
a commercial success. The mature crop was made into rum after Wilkinson's death, a fact which so angered Dowager Queen Kaabumanu that she
ordered the cane plowed under and the land planted with sweet potatoes.
The real beginning of the sugar industry, however, came in 1835,
when Peter Allan Brinsmade, William Ladd, and William Hooper--all
New Englanders with missionary connections who had come to Honolulu in
1833 to establish a "mercantile trading house"—decided that the
greatest commercial opportunities in the islands lay in agriculture.
Under the name of Ladd & Co. they leased 980 acres of land at Koloa,
on the Island of Kauai, from King Kamehameha III at an annual rent
of -£300. The lease included a mill site and a waterfall for power
at Maulili pool, about a mile from the Koloa landing.
Hooper, a young man of energy, moved to the leased land as manager.
Though "well nigh starved into a retreat" by taboos placed on the
enterprise by jealous chiefs, he laid out 12 acres on September 12,
1835* and gradually made headway. A mill was completed at Maulili pool
in I836, but only molasses was produced the first year. The wooden
rollers of the mill wore out under the grinding. The next year iron
rollers were imported and a new mill built--tbe first iron sugar mill
in Hawaii. Hooper proudly told his partners, "our work at Maulili
will forever remain a monument and an honor to the house of Ladd & Co."
160
Well might he congratulated himself, since the 4,286 pounds of sugar
and 2,700 gallons of -molasses produced in I837 marked the first real
production of sugar on a commercial scale in Hawaii. This very success, however, was not without its bitterness,since Hooper feared the
molasses would be shippedto distillers for the'making of liquor.
The second mill proved unsuccessful, so in I839 a new mill site
on Waihohonu Stream--the site of the present Kbloa--was leased from
the king. Completed in l84l at a cost of about $15,950, the remains
of this structure still stand. The great square smokestack is said
to bear the date "1842."
Due to financial difficulties, ladd & Co. lost its interest in
Koloa plantation in 1845. But its influence on the Hawaiian economy
had been great. As one authority has said, the firm was the first to
institute agricultural operations in the islands on an extensive scale
"and to demonstrate to others the profits that might be obtained from
the production of sugar. They inaugurated the Hawaiian system of plantations conducted and financed by central agencies in Honolulu, and the
methods of housing and caring for the labor adopted by Mr. Hooper have
been continued and are still (1935) followed by the Hawaiian sugar
planters."
Later owners continued to expand the plantation, and it became
highly profitable under the ownership of Dr. R. W. Wood after 1848.
It is still in operation, although its last independent owner, the
Koloa Sugar Company, merged with the Grove Barm Company in 1948.
In addition to its pioneering role in sugar production, the plantation has had other important associations with the development of
the modern sugar industry. In 1841, for example, there occurred what
161
may have been the first general strike by native laborers on the
islands. Their demands for higher wages--"an evidence that they were
getting civilized"--met failure. Here Samuel Burbank developed a deep
plow which greatly improved production; also, the first, or one of the
first, steam engines used in island milling was introduced here in
1853 • Also, the plantation was one of the earliest to inaugurate the
contract system of cultivating and cutting cane to give laborers an
interest in the crop and to reduce their tendency to migrate. The effort
proved successful and was "universally" adopted by other Hawaiian sugar
planters.
Condition of the Site
The massive square stone foundation of the 18^1 mill chimney and
the foundations of the mill still stand. They are at present covered
with a dense grove of trees and brush, but the intent of the owners is
to preserve them as part of a museum of the sugar industry. The ruins
stand at the very edge of the extensive sugar fields which surround Koloa.
References; Arthur C. Alexander, Koloa Plantation, 1833-1935: A
History of the Oldest Hawaiian Sugar Plantation (Honolulu, 1937);
Ethel M. Damon, Koamalu. A Story of Pioneers on Kauai (2 vols., Honolulu,
1931), I, 176-200; Ethel M. Damon, Sanford Ballard Dole and his Hawaii
(Palo Alto, Calif., 1957)> 3^; Hawaiian Sugar Planters' Association,
Sugar in Hawaii (Honolulu, 19^9)> 12-15; Hawaii's Sugar Hews, September,
1953; January, 1935; John W. Vandercook, King Cane; The Story of Sugar
in Hawaii (New York, 1939)> 22-25.
162
Old Sugar Mill, Koloa, Kauai; ruins of the 1841 mill on Hawaii's first largescale sugar plantation. „ ,, s_ ,,,,otOKraph. 1962
IOIAftI PALACE, (STATE CAPITOL)
location: The palace is at 36^ S. King Street in downtown
Honolulu, Island of Oahu* It stands in the center
of "Palace Square," a 3-acre city block bounded
by King, Richards, Hotel, and Likelike Streets.
Ownership: Owned by the State of Hawaii, administered by
the Department of Accounting and General Services*
Significance
Iolani Palace was the royal residence of the last two rulers of the
Kingdom of Hawaii, King Kalakaua and Queen Liliuokalani. As such it is
perhaps the most important surviving symbol of the period of Hawaiian
independence. It has been termed "the only,true royal palace under
the American flag*" Exotic in architecture, it illustrates the tastes,
cultural aspirations, and the cosmopolitanism of the Hawaiian ruling
classes under the monarchy. Since 1893—under the Provisional Government, the Republic of Hawaii, the Territory of Hawaii, and the State
of Hawaii—it has been the seat of governmental authority* As the scene
of the formal ceremony of transfer of the Hawaiian Islands to the United
States, it is intimately associated with one of the principal events
which marked the rise of the United States as a world power.
The site of the palace was once a section of the important heiau
(temple), Kaahaimauli, which was destroyed in the early 1800's. A
coral block and wood house later erected on the site was selected by
King Kamehameha III as his palace when he finally moved the royal
residence from Maui to Honolulu in 18^3«
In 16^-5 Kamehameha III erected a new palace, later called the
"Old Iolani Palace," on this spot. live Hawaiian kings reigned in
this coral-block structure. It housed office.s .mainly, since smaller
X63
buildings on the grounds served as residences for the rulers and
the court. In 1878-79 the old palace was torn down, and it was decided
to build a "proper palace" on the same site.
The cornerstone of the present Iolani Palace was laid on December
31/ 1879/ and the structure was completed in 1882. The cost was
$3^3*595* Early in the next year King Kalakaua and Queen Kapiolaai
were formally crowned at a ceremony held in front of the palace.
This event, the only formal coronation in Hawaiian history, took
place nine years after Kalakaua!s election to the throne.
In the "Blue Room" of the palace in 1893/ Queen Liliuokolani
demanded that her ministers sign a new constitution increasing the
royal powers. They refused, an event which led to the overthrow of
the monarchy on January 17, I893. A few months later the Provisional
Government transferred the governmental offices to the former royal
residence, where they have remained to the present day. After the
unsuccessful conspiracy to restore the Queen to power in 1895/ the
trial of the former monarch and her fellow conspirators took place
in the throne room. The queen was imprisoned on the upper floor
for nine months after the insurrection.
The King Street steps of the palace were the scene of the formal
ceremony transferring the sovereignty of the Hawaiian Islands to the
United States. Over the building on August 12, 1898, the Hawaiian
flag/ as the emblem of an independent nation, flew for the last time.
After appropriate salutes, it descended "like a wounded bird," and
the United States flag was raised in its place.
164
Since 1898 the palace has housed the office of the Territorial
and State governors, both houses of the Legislature, and several other
important governmental offices.
Condition of the Site
Iolani Palace is an ornate structure of eclectic style. It is
built of brick, faced with cement, and measures 1^0 feet by 100 feet,
with the long dimension facing King Street. It is 2 stories high ahove
a partially raised basement. It is ornamented by 6 towers, the central
towers rising to a height of 76 feet. In 1930 the interior was extensively
remodeled; steel and reinforced concrete framing replaced the old wooden
framing; and a roof of concrete slabs was installed; but the interior
and exterior design was scrupulously preserved. An unusual exterior
feature is formed by the double lanais or porticos on the four sides.
The interior finish is extremely ornate, marked by elaborate
ornamental plaster cornices and ceilings. Prom a large central hall
on the main floor, a fine staircase of koa wood leads to the upper
story. Throughout, doors and paneling are of rare woods—koa, kamani,
kau, and ohia, as well as the more usual walnut and white cedar. Many
outstanding portraits hang on the walls.
The southeast corner of the main floor is occupied by the former
throne room. This room is used for the sessions of the State House of
Representatives, hut when the Legislature is not in session the desks
are removed, and the room is restored to an approximation of it appearance as a royal throne room. Replicas of the original thrones are on
display on the dias. Across the hall is the former state dining room,
now used as the Senate Chamber. Upstairs, the former private apartment of Kalakaua and, later, Liliuokalaui, is now the Governor's
165
Tolani Palace, Capitol of the State of Hawaii and former royal residence; scene of United States flag raising, 1898.
Courtesy Hawaii Visitors Bureau
office. The handsome building seems to be fundamentally sound, but
repairs are necessary. It has been temporarily defaced by the construction of offices on the lanais. The adopted State Capitol plan
calls for the preservation of lolani Palace, although the building may
be overshadowed by the new Capitol.
The palace grounds, a square block in extent, are attractively
landscaped and contain several notable features. One of these is the
delightfully elegant little bandstand, built for the coronation in 1883.
Another is the site of the royal tomb, where most of Hawaii's monarchs
were buried until I865, when all the royal coffins were removed to the
Royal Itasoleum in Huuanu Valley.
References: Andrew Farrell, The Story of lolani Palace (Honolulu,
1936); Hawaii Visitors Bureau, lolani Palace (Informational folder,
Honolulu, /T95877; Ralph S. Kuykendall and A. Grove Day, Hawaii: A History
(New York,HL9W, pp. 165-190.
166
PEARL HARBOR NAVAL BASE (NAVAL BASE, PEARL HARBOR: U.S.S* "ARIZONA" MEMORIAL)
Location: The main base is on the southeastern shore
of Pearl Harbor, on the south coast of Oahu about
6 miles west of Honolulu; but the base and related installations nearly surround Pearl Harbor*
Ownership: United States Government, Department of the Navy.
Significance
The splendid, landlocked anchorage at Pearl Harbor was one of the
principal reasons for early United States interest in Hawaii, and undoubtedly the strategic importance of this bay was a factor leading to
annexation. The possession of the harbor and the development of a
naval base and headquarters there after 1898 were important factors in
the rise of United States naval power in the Pacific. The disputing
of this power by Japan, in turn, eventually contributed to the precipitation of war between the United States and Japan, the significant
opening shots of which occurred at Pearl Harbor on December 7,« 1941.
The site, then, appears intimately associated with the rise of the
United States as a world power.
Pearl Harbor is a double estuary formed by the "drowning" of
the valley of the Pearl River, so named because pearl oysters once
abounded there. The ancient Bawaiians believed it was the home of the
shark goddess, ACaahupahua. This fine harbor was known to early traders,
but almost no use was made of it because a coral reef across the entrance blocked access by vessels drawing more than 10 feet of water.
Yet its potential value was early recognized. Members of the Wilkes
expedition examined it; and in 1845 Lieut. I. W. Curtis, "an American
marine officer," pointed out the importance of the harbor for defense
of the islands.
167
As early as 1864 American Minister James McBride suggested that the
cession to the United States of land at Honolulu for naval depot purposes should be made a condition of granting Hawaii a reciprocity treaty,
a recommendation considered by historians as "one of the early antecedents of the Pearl Harbor Question." The real beginning of American
governmental interest came in 1873 when Maj. Gen. John M. Schofield and
Bvt. Brig. Gen. B. S. Alexander were sent to Hawaii to examine defensive
and commercial capabilities of various ports. Their report emphasized
the value of Pearl Harbor. At that time Hawaii was anxious to nego *
tiate a reciprocity treaty with the United States, and it was suggested
that Pearl Harbor be leased to the United States as an inducement to
sign the treaty. The Hawaiian government actually made such an offer
in 1873 Hut later withdrew it, and such a measure was not included in
the treaty which went into effect in I876.
When that treaty was renewed in 1QQ7, however, it did give tne
United States the exclusive right to maintain a coaling and repair
station at Pearl Harbor. But the United States did not exercise this
right until after annexation in 1898, although surveys were made
earlier during the 1890's. The need for an island base during the
Spanish American War had been one of the arguments used by annexationists.
Funds for improving the harbor entrance were voted by Congress in
1900, and that same year negotiations were started for the acquisition
of adjoining land for a naval station. The bar at the entrance was
dredged to a depth of 35 feet in 1902 after interesting ceremonies to
placate Hawaiian gods for the destruction of a fishpond and fish god
shrine. Not until I908, however, did Congress authorize and vote funds
168
Artist's sketch of U.S.S. Arizona Memorial, Pearl Harbor Naval Base. Honolulu. Navy Department Photograph. 1962
for the development of a major base. A huge drydock was started in
1909 but it collapsed and was not completed until 1919• Tbe Hawaiians
attributed the failure to the construction of the drydock over the
traditional home of the shark queen's son. Shops, docks, and other
structures were started with the 1908 appropriation, and in 1911 the
U.S.S. California entered the harbor, officially opening the base and
being the first large ship to enter the bay* An administration building was completed in 1915> and the next year Pearl Harbor became the
headquarters of a Naval District; and it was well on its way to becoming the command center for naval operations in the Pacific.
In order to knock out of action the Pacific Fleet based there, the
Japanese staged a surprise air attack on Pearl Harbor on the morning of
December 7, 19^1> sinking or damaging 18 ships out of the 97 i& Pearl
Harbor. This action precipitated United States participation in World
War II. The U.S.S. Arizona, with more than 1,100 men entombed within,
still rests where she settled during the attack and, spanned by an
enclosed memorial bridge, has been dedicated as a shrine to those
killed on December 7, 19*4-1.
Condition of the Site
Pearl Harbor is still an active naval base, and general public
visitation, except to the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial as part of boat
cruises of the harbor, is not permitted. However, public visits
to the U.S.S. Arizona Memorial as part of privately sponsored boat
tours or of Government-sponsored boat tours would permit the viewing
of a plaque recognizing the significance of the entire base.
I69
References; W. F* Dillingham, "Pearl Harbor," la United States
Naval Institute_„jfryceedlags» May, 1930; J; K. Goodrlchj The Coming
Hawaii; Repor-iT of" the Se cretary of the Navy (1922); Hawaii, A Guide
to All the Islands (Mealo Park, Calif., 196l), 29; Ralph S, Kuykendall,
The Hawaiian Kingdom, 18^-187^ (Honolulu, 1953), 200, 21+8-257;
Walter Lord, Day of Infamy J1957); Walter MLllis, This is PearlI
The United States and Japan, Igl+l (19^7), Samuel Eliot Morison,
The Rising Sun in the Pacific (fiistory of United States Naval
Operations in World War II, vol III, 19^J; Youx Visit to'Tearl
Harbor (folder, Fourteenth Naval District, Honolulu, jjtt. oj7 .
170
AREAS IN THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM RELATED TO THEME
!• City of Refuge National Historical Park. Located at Honaunau
on the coast of Kona, about 20 miles south of Kailua, on the Island of
Hawaii, this park of 180 acres preserves a complex of ruins representating almost all phases of the ancient Hawaiian culture. The most important and impressive feature is the vast pu'uhonua, or place of refuge, enclosed on two sides by a massive stone wall, in places 17 feet
wide and 12 feet high. It was established by the kings and chiefs who
lived at Honaunau Bay as a sanctuary for non-combatants and defeated
soldiers in time of war, for criminals, and for taboo-breakers.
Associated with the pu-uhon.ua are the stone remains of several
heiaus or temples, including the platform of the Hale-o-Keawe, a highly
sacred house which contained the deified bones of at least 2k Hawaiian
kings and chiefs. Wear the enclosure are remains of royal house platforms, fish ponds, and sledding tracks. Throughout the park there are
remains of Hawaiian homes, several temple or shrine platforms, walls,
ancient and recent trails and roads, .canoe landings, and many other
cultural features.
Although the principal values preserved by the park relate to
the ancient Hawaiian culture and are thus ethnographic in character,
there are also a number of important historical associations. The
Hale-o-Keawe was built as a place of deposit for the bones of Keawe,
a historical personage who ruled the island in the middle l600's and
who was great-grandfather of Kamehameha I. Several fairly significant
events associated with Kamehameha^ rise to power as ruler of all the
islands occurred at Honaunau, including the deposition there in 17&2
of the bones of King Kalaniopuu, uncle and a predecessor of ICamehameha
171.
as ruler of the island, and the subsequent declaration "on the west
side of the Hale-o-Keawe" by the new king, Kiwalao, that he was to
control the land. The Kona chiefs under Kamehameha were dissatisfied
with the resultant land division. In the battle at nearby Ke'ei, which
soon followed, Kiwalao was killed, and Hawaii was split into three
kingdoms, of which Kamehameha ruled one. After the abolition of the
ancient Hawaiian religion and the destruction of the old temples in
1819> the Hale-o-Keawe was considered so sacred that it and its contents
of bones remained relatively undisturbed until 1329/ when the regent,
Kaahumanu, removed the remains and buried or burned them. The ruins of
the village of Killae at the south end of the park and the relatively
well-preserved road of I87I graphically illustrate the evolution of
Hawaiian life under the impact of Western civilization.
2. Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Covering an area of about 344
square miles on the Island of Hawaii, this park includes the craters of
the only two Hawaiian volcanoes still considered to be active--Kilauea
and Mauna Loa. It also encompasses a long stretch of the island's
southwestern coast, and its lands rise from sea level to an elevation
of 13,680 feet at the summit of Mauna Loa.
The values of this park are chiefly geologic, scientific, and
scenic in nature, but it has several sites with important historical
association., The native Hawaiians lived principally on the seashore
and the uplands of moderate elevation, and they generally entered the
mountain regions only for special purposes, such as the harvesting of
certain forest products and trees, the catching of birds, the use of
shorter routes of travel, and the worship of the volcano goddess, Pele.
172
According to ancient tradition, Pele lived in whichever Hawaiian volcano
was currently active. Thus in recent centuries her home was believed
to be in Halemaumau, the principal vent of Kilauea Volcano. After the
official abolition of the ancient Hawaiian religion in 1819, the people
on the Island of Hawaii found it difficult to renounce entirely their
belief in the old gods, particularly Pele who was so much feared. In
182U Kapiolani, a high chiefess of Kona, entered the Halemaumau fire
pit and defied Pele, thus doing much to shatter the last remnants of
belief in the old gods and paving the way for a wider acceptance of
Christianity (see discussion of Site of Kapiolani's Defiance of Pele"
in section Other Sites Evaluated^" page 176).
The sections of the Puna and Kau coasts lying within the park
were favorite residences of the ancient Hawaiians. This region of the
park is rich in remains of villages, temples, canoe landings, petroglyphs, and other evidences of native life. For the most part, these
sites and remains are chiefly valuable from an archeologic and ethnographic viewpoint, but they also have historical associations. In particular the dramatic ruin of the Wahaula Heiau, in the Kalopana Extension
section of the park, is thought to be the "last heiau in which worship
was publicly offered to the Hawaiian gods" (see discussion of "Wahaula
Heiau" in section "Sites Also Noted," page 19^).
3. Haleakala National Park. Located on the summit and slopes of
Haleakala Volcano on the Island of Maui, this park's nearly 27 square
miles are largely occupied by the huge and magnificent Haleakala Crater.
Remains of rock shelter walls, trails, and a temple platform, as wellas a number of legends and traditional stories, attest to the use of
the park area by the ancient Hawaiians; but apparently the crater and
its surrounding slopes were not the scene of any historical events of
major importance.
173
Kealakekua Bay, Island of Hawaii, 1962. from the top of Hikiau Heiau, showing approximately the same scene as the 1779
view; Cook Monument in distance. u „ .. „, , ,„.,
N. P. h. Photograph. 1962
Hulihee Palace, Kailua. Island of Hawaii; front view. V I' S. i'lintugraph, 1962
OTHER SITES CONSIDERED
A. Island of Hawaii
1. Cook Monument. On the northwest shore of Kealakekua Bay
at Kaavaloa, South Kona District, Island of Hawaii; 1/7 acre;
excellent condition hut accessible only by trail or boat; owned,
for tax purposes, by a trust, but is private property.
This white concrete shaft, and a nearby plaque close to the
actual death site, commemorate the killing of the great English
explorer and discoverer of the Hawaiian Islands, Captain James Cook,
by the Hawaiian natives on February 14, 1779* IXiring his second
visit to the islands Cook anchored in Kealakekua Bay to refit his
two ships. The natives, who believed Cook was an incarnation of
their god Lono, were friendly and helpful, but they increasingly
stole articles from the ships. Finally, the Discovery's cutter
was taken, and Cook went ashore to obtain the king as hostage. In
the short, almost accidental, fight which followed, Cook and four
marines were killed.
The death of Cook was an important loss to the world of science
and to the British Empire, but probably it was not a matter of major
significance in the history of Hawaii. His major contribution to
Hawaii was his discovery of the islands in 1778, an event which probably can best be commemorated at the place he first landed, on Kauai.
2. Hikiau Heiau. On the eastern shore of Kealakekua Bay, in
Napoopoo, South Kona District, Island of Hawaii; about 5 acres;
recently "restored" and makes an excellent and exceedingly impressive
appearance; owned by the State of Hawaii.
This piled rock temple platform is a "truncated pyramid" which in
1908 measured 190 by 105 feet, with a seaward face 15 feet high. At
that time it was reported to be well paved, with two divisions. It has
since been twice "restored," but not under the supervision of archeologists. It was a heiau of the highest class, a place of human sacrifice.
Hikiau Heiau has an unusually large number of associations with
important events in Hawaiian history. On Captain James Cook's second
visit to the islands his two ships anchored and refitted at Kealakekua
Bay during parts of January and February, 1779• The Hawaiians had decided that Cook was an incarnation of their god Lono, and they determined to worship him as such. Thus the high priest of Hikiau Heiau,
an old man named Koa, visited Cook aboard ship, accompanied him ashore,
and led him to the heiau where ceremonies of veneration were performed.
The description of the rites by Captain James King is of importance to
ethnologists. One of Cook's seamen, V/ilUam Whatman, died on board ship,
17^
anion January 28, 1779> his body was brought ashore and, it is said,
interred in the heiau with the permission of the native priests. It
is said that the observances at his grave constituted "the first recorded Christian services in the Hawaiian Islands." Cook also used the
heiau area for making astronomical observations.
According to tradition, Kiwalao, the Icing of Hawaii who was defeated by Kamehameha and killed in the battle of Mokuohai in 1782, •
was buried in the temple of Hikiau. The heiau also figures in the
annals of Vancouver's voyages and is well described therein. It is
reported that the native, Henry Opukahaia, said to have been born at
Punaluu, Kau, about 1792, was being trained by his uncle for the
Hawaiian priesthood at Hikiau Heiau when, saddened by the memory of the
cruel deaths of his parents in war and wishing to leave the country,
he joined an American vessel in Kealakekua Bay, reaching New York in I809.
His desire for an education and his conversion to Christianity aroused
widespread interest in New England and were significantly responsible
for the organization of the Hawaiian Mission. His story "is a classic
in the history of modern Christian missions."
Despite the associations with the Whatman burial and with the departure of Opukahaia for the United States, both of which events are
commemorated by plaques at the site, the Christianization of the
islands can perhaps be more dramatically and significantly illustrated
elsewhere, Also, not all archeologists are convinced that the present
form of the heiau truly represents its appearance when it was an active
place of Hawaiian worship,
3* Hulihee Palace. On the ocean side of Alii Drive, in Kailua,
North Knna, Island of Hawaii; one acre; excellent condition; owned byState of Hawaii and administered by Daughters of Hawaii as a house
museum.
This handsome, two-story structure, built of plastered lava rock
with walls three feet thick, stands on a traditional homesite of
Hawaiian royalty and nobility. It was built in I837-I838 by Kuakini,
governor of the Island of Hawaii, and served as the residence of the
governors for many years. In 1884 it was acquired by King Kalakaua,
who remodelled it and used it as his "Summer Palace." In 1925 the
property was acquired by the Territory of Hawaii through the efforts
of the Daughters of Hawaii, who have furnished it approximately as it
was during Kalakaua's time and administer it as a house museum.
Hulihee, with its beautiful grounds bordering the sea, is significant as perhaps the oldest surviving example of a chief's residence built at a time when the Hawaiian nobility and royalty were
attempting to adjust to the ways of Western civilization. As now
refurnished, it reflects the tastes and elegance of the Hawaiian royal
family during the l88o's. However, several.other structures also illustrate this latter phase of Hawaiian history; and one in particular,
lolani Palace in Honolulu, undoubtedly possesses more general historical
importance *
175
h. Site of Kapiolani's Defiance of Pele (Halemaumau). The chief
vent of the Kilauea Crater, in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Island of
Hawaii; 250 acres; undisturbed condition; administered by the National
Park Service, Department of the Interior, (See photo following page
22,)
After the official abolition of the old Hawaiian religion and kapu
system by King Liholiho in 1819, many Hawaiians secretly continued
to believe in the old gods. On the Island of Hawaii, particularly,
this belief centered about Pele, the volcano goddess, whose home was
thought to be in the fire pit of Halemaumau, Kapiolani, a chiefess
of the highest rank whose home was at Kaawaloa, in Kona, had come
under the influence of the missionaries and had been instructed in
Christianity, Determined to prove to herself and her people that
the old Hawaiian gods were not real, she went to Halemaumau and, on or
about December 21, 1824, descended part way into the fire pit without
making conciliatory offerings to Pele. No dire consequence followed,
and this act of moral courage was instrumental in breaking down the last
remnants of the old religion and opening the way for Christianity
among the Hawaiian people.
Although this site is importantly connected with a major event
in Hawaiian history, the story of the end of the kapu system probably
can best be told at Kailua, where the official termination of the old
religion was first proclaimed.
5» Kuaroo'0 Battlefield. On coast 0.8 mile south of Keauhou,
North Kona District, Island of Hawaii, about 200 acres; relatively
undisturbed condition but difficult of access; privately owned.
The abolition of the kapu system and the destruction of the
ancient Hawaiian gods by King Liholiho during October and November,
1819, was an event of great significance in Hawaiian history, since it
disrupted the old social organization and thus paved the way for the
acceptance of Christianity. Not all chiefs and priests approved this
measure, however, and a formidajole revolt was raised on Hawaii against
the royal government by the sincere and pious chief and ne\; high priest,
Kekuaokalani, The defenders of the old gods met the royal army at
Kuamo'o, probably late in December, 1819, and were defeated. The
brave Kekuaokalani and his wife, Manono, were killed and buried on
the field of battle. With their deaths, effective opposition to the
abolition of the kapus came to an end.
Although the site is of undoubted historical importance, the significant broad topic with which it is associated — the abolition of the
tabus — can be as effectively commemorated at Kailua, The rather
indefinite location and extent of the battlefield and its presently
isolated situation --it can be reached only by jeep trail — seem to
render this site somewhat unsuitable for landmark status, although
the graves of the defeated warriors are still impressive and there
are long-range plans for opening a road along this section of the coast.
176
Mokuaikaua Church, Kailua, Island of Hawaii, creeled in 1836. Courtesy Hawaii Vlsltcai Bureau
6. Mokuaikaua ChttE$h> fen the landward side of Alii Drive, in
Kailua, North Kona District, Island of Hawaii; about one acre; excellent condition; an active Congregational church.
This large and substantial stone church, topped by a graceful
steeple, stands today essentially as it was when first built in I836.
The walls and most of the wooden beams and pillars are original.
Architecturally it perhaps is the most typical and at the same time
the most impressive of the American Board mission churches, reflecting
in every line the New England origin of the pioneer Protestant missionaries .
The original band of American Board "pilgrims" first landed officially in the islands at Kailua on April U, 1820. Most of them went on
to Oahu and Kauai, but the Rev. Asa Thurston and his wife remained at
Kailua to establish a mission. In October, 1820, they followed the
royal family to Honolulu but returned in October, 1823, to continue
the work. They found that the local governor, Kuakini, had already
started to build a thatched church. This first Mokuaikaua Church,
which also served as a school, soon proved too small for the large
congregations, and in 1826 Governor Kuakini had a new structure built
which, it is said, could hold h,80O people. This second frame church
was burned by an incendiary in l835«
Kuakini again lent his assistance, and on January 1, 1836, the
cornerstone of the present church was laid. This time the walls were
built of stone, large hewn blocks from old heiaus being used for "tie"
stones at the corners. The great wooden pillars and beams were made
from hewn ohia logs, cut in the high forests. The Rev, Mr* Thurston
made the design and supervised construction. The building was completed during 1836 and dedicated on February k, l837« Although the
population of Kona has greatly declined during the last century, the
church has continued to be active. Mokuaikaua has been called the
"pioneer mission station of all" and "the oldest church in the Hawaiian
Islands," evidently because the missionaries first landed there. In
view of the break in the Thurstons' residence, however, this honor probably belongs to the church in Honolulu. Perhaps it is not, as is
sometimes claimed, "the oldest church building now left us" (see
Kaluaaha Church under the section "Sites Also Noted"); but its early
establishment, its impressive construction; and its architectural
merit give it significance as a highly representative Hawaiian
Mission church.
7. Parker Ranch. On and adjoining the Waimea Plateau from Mauna
Kea to the hills of Kohala in the northern part of the Island of Hawaii,
with headquarters at Kamuela; about 262,000 acres; an active cattle
ranch with well-preserved old headquarters buildings; owned by Richard
Palmer Smart.
This vast and long-established cattle ranch, said to be largest in
the United States under single ownership and second in area only to the
177
King Ranch of Texas, is eloquent testimony to the little-known fact
that cattle ranching was a major industry in the Hawaiian Islands long
before the development of the long drives and the flourishing ranches
of the Anglo-American Vfest. In 1793 the explorer, Captain George
Vancouver, brought some rangy longhorn cattle from California and pre*-
sented them to Kamehameha, who turned them loose to breed. The king
realized that these new animals could be a great benefit to his people,
and he placed them under a rigid Kapu, and for 20 years it was forbidden
to kill them. Upon the lifting of the taboo, the Hawaiians, knowing
nothing about the techniques of the roundup, hunted and shot the
steers like game. Rights to hunt cattle were often leased by the king
or chiefs, and the salted meat was sold to ships. A flourishing cattlehunting industry developed and continued for many years,but sometime
before 1830 vagueros were brought in from Mexico and California to
teach the Hawaiians how to handle horses and cattle. The natives
quickly mastered the trade, and Hawaiian paniolos — cowboys — became
known as among the best in the world. Chiefs and foreigners soon developed ranches on the islands, and from 1850 to 1870 the industry
grew quickly, being the only one successfully to rival sugar. By
I870 the capacity of the ranges, under the techniques then employed,
was about reached, and the industry remained stable, but still an
important factor in the economy for many years; it still is one of
Hawaii's major sources of agricultural income.
One of the early cattle hunters was John Palmer Parker, of Newton,
Massachusetts, a sailor who settled at Kawaihae about l8l6 and was engaged by Kamehameha to harvest his cattle in the Waimea plateau area.
Parker became a trusted adviser and friend to the monarch and under
Kamehameha III was rewarded by the grant of a two-acre tract of land at
Mana. Under Kamehameha III he received a franchise to reduce the wild
herds and chose to do so by domesticating large numbers of them. He
married a Hawaiian chiefess and founded a family which has continued to
add to its holdings of land and cattle, thereby developing one of the
great ranches of the world.
As the principal ranch on the islands, the Parker Ranch is the
most suitable place to commemorate an industry which holds an important
place in the Hawaiian economy. From the national viewpoint, however,
ranching in Hawaii was never as significant as the sugar industry in
bringing the islands into the economic and political orbit of the
United States.
The John Palmer Parker home at Mana, seven miles from Waimea, has
been restored as a museum. The ranch headquarters village of Kamuela
(Waimea) is also being refurbished and "restored" to its appearance
during the monarchy. Upon the death of the present owner, the ranch
will be held in trust for the benefit of its employees and the State
of Hawaii.
178
B. Island of Kauai
8, Gulick-Rowell House (Rowell House). On the north side of Huakai
Road at the western outskirts of Waimea, Island of Kauai; about one
acre; good condition; owned by Waimea Sugar Ilille Co., Ltd. (a subsidiary of American Factors Associates, Ltd.) and used as a residence.
The mission station at waimea was established in 1820 by members
of the first band of missionaries to reach the islands. In 1828 three
helpers, including the Rev. and Mrs. Peter J. Gulick, joined the
station. After living in a thatched house for a while, Mr. Gulick
determined to build a home of sandstone, a ledge of which had been
found about a mile from the house site. The hauling of the heaviest
blocks was done by ox-cart, an innovation on the island, where stones
had always previously been carried by manpower* The house was perhaps still unfinished in I834 when the Gulicks were transferred,
although in I832 a visitor noted "the neat, new houses of Mr. Gulick,
Mr. Whitney and Gov. Kaikioewa" all in a parallel line near the church.
In 1846 the Rev, George B. Rowell and his family arrived in Waimea
and moved into the old Gulick home, which had long been unoccupied.
He rebuilt and enlarged it. The Rowell family lived in the house for
many years, and the Rev. Mr. Rowell (1815-1884) is buried on the
grounds.
This three-story house, with its thick plastered stone walls,
deep window ledges, large kitchen fireplace, and double Dutch door,
is one of the oldest and finest of the remaining missionary residences.
Despite the double lanais on three sides, it maintains a New England
appearance. As with several other important mission homes, however,
it must yield the honor of greatest significance to the Mission Houses
in Honolulu.
9» Waioli Mission and Waioli Mission House (Waioli Meeting House).
On the inland side of the highway, adjoining the present-day Waioli
Hui'ia Church, in Hanalei, Island of Kauai; about five acres; excellent
condition; incorporated as a Wilcox Family trust.
In 1834 the Rev. William P. Alexander, who had reached Honolulu
with the Fifth Company of missionaries in 1832 and had spent some time
in mission work in the Marquesas and Society Islands, was appointed
to labor at Waioli, "a field as yet unoccupied by missionaries." A
location for the new mission and residence was selected on July 20,
1834, and in the fall the Alexander family reached Waioli and moved
into a thatched hut built for them by the natives. A meetinghouse and
schoolhouse were soon built, and a church was organized during October,
1835.
A larger church structure was needed, however, and its construction
occupied the entire community for more than five years. By 1837 "the
people had started to grow cotton to raise funds, and later sugai- was
179
Gulick-Rowell House, Waimea, Island of Kauai, built about 1832-1834, one of the oldest missionary houses in the islands.
X. P. S. Photograph. 1962
Waioli Mission Meeting House, Ilanalei, Island of Kauai, completed in 1841. V r S. Photograph. 1962
Alexander Home, Wailuku. Island of Maui; completed in 1837; birthplace of General Samuel Chapman Armstrong.
N. P. S. Photograph. IP62
raised for the same purpose. By 1839 jsost of the timber had been
collected. The man went into the mountains to cut and dress the needed trees.
"It was an exciting time in Waioli," said one account, "when the
whole population, with long ropes, with shouts and chanting, dragged
the heavy timbers into place for the church," The new meetinghouse
was completed during November, X&kl, It was a frame structure, 35
by 75 feet, plastered inside and out. The belfry was a separate
structure. The original grass roof was later replaced by one of
shingles.
The missionary residence was started in 1836, the stone chimney
being laid up by "Father*1 Alexander himself. The lumber and furnishings
are said to have been brought around the Horn, and the New Jftigland
architecture reflects the taste of its designers.
Due to ill health, Mr, Alexander was sent to take charge of
lahainaluna, on Maui, in I8J+3. He was one of the best-known of the
American missionaries and made important contributions to mission
work in the Pacific, The successors of the Alexanders were the Rev.
and Mrs. George B. Rowell; and in 18^6 Abner Wilcox and his family
came to Waioli. The Wilcox family later purchased the old home. In
1912 a new Waioli Church was built, and the old church and belfry were
left in the graveyard. Both church and residence were restored in
1921 and are in excellent condition. The old church now serves as
a parish and community hall. The handsome home, still containing
many of its original furnishings, is used as a summer residence and can
be visited by the public.
The mission structure, with its high, peaked roof and lanais on
all sides, is a typical adaptation of the early native grass house
to more permanent materials. It is frequently claimed that the Waioli
Mission was the prototype for the modern "Hawaiian Style" of architecture. However, the honor is also claimed for Ahuimanu, a Honolulu
residence built in 185^, which is said to have been the "inspiration"
of Bertram Goodhue in designing the Honolulu Academy of Arts.
From the standpoints of appearance, integrity of historic scene,
and architecture, the Waioli Mission and residence must be classified as the most representative existing structures of the missionary period in Hawaii, From the standpoints of age and historical
importance, however, they must yield to the Mission Houses in Honolulu.
C. Island of Maui
10. Alexander Home. 2331 Main Street, in V/ailuku, Island of Maui;
2.7h acres; excellent condition; owned and used as a parsonage by the
Wailuku Union Church.
This two-story, stone residence, termed "the oldest building
in Wailuku," is one of the most important and oldest of the surviving
180
missionary homes on the islandsi It was begun as a home for the
Rev. Richard Armstrong in I835 and was completed two years later.
The dormers for the second story windows are a rather unusual feature
for Hawaiian homes. Here, on Janu&ry S%; a.839, was born General
Samuel Chapman Armstrong, who in looO.fbuh^ Hampton Institute in
Virginia to educate Negroes and American: Indians on the pattern of
the Lahainaluna Seminary on his native -island of Maui- From I856
to 1884 the structure was the home of the Rev. William Patterson
Alexander, one of the most prominent and important of the American
missionaries.
The significance of this structure is somewhat reduced by the
fact that it has been twice remodeled, once in 1843 and again in 1949.
The historical character of the building has been preserved, but most
of the wood has been replaced.
*^* Bailey Home and Wat luku Female Seminary (Hale Hoikeike)
(Bailey Mission). 2375-A Main Street (Iao Road), in walluku, Island
of Maui; O.36 acre; good oondition; owned by Wailuku Sugar Company
(a subsidiary of C. Brewer and Company) and administered by the Maui
Historical Society as a museum.
The Rev. Jonathan S» Green founded a mission station at Wailuku
in 1831* The mission structures were on a sloping plain — the present
location of Nailuku — overlooking central Maui and backed by a precipitous mountain ridge. "There is beauty here," remarked one early visitor.
In keeping with the missionary belief that the natives could only
become exemplary Christians by changing their old ways of life, Green
organized the Wailuku Female Seminary In 1837. His purpose was to take
"young females" into a boarding school "away in a measure from the
contaminating influence of heathen society," instruct them, and "make
them examples of propriety," The school was opened on July 6, l837.>
with Mr. Green as instructor and a class of30 pupils.
The main building, a two-story stone^ structure; the chapel, lecture
rooms; and two ranges of adobe dormitories no longer stand. The only
surviving building is the latchen-dining room which was built adjoining the main structure in 1838-1839* It is stone, one story high with
a basement, measuring 45 by 18 feet, with a lanai on all sides. Some
of the original glass window panes, brought around the Horn, are still
in place.
In 1840 or l84l (available sources do not agree) Mr. Edward Bailey
succeeded Green as head instructor. He was a remarkable man --a painter,
poet, naturalist, and later, a mill owner and postmaster. The present
Bailey Home, almost adjoining the existing seminary building, was
erected as his residence in l84l. It is a three-story stone structure,
with walls 20 inches thick, It has a lanai on two sides. The walls
are plastered inside and out, the plaster, it is said, being held together by human hair contributed by Hawaiian women. The kitchen, once
181
separated from the main house, has been joined to it.
The school flourished for a while under Bailey's supervision.
The largest number of pupils at any one time was 70. The seminary was
abandoned about 18U8, however, "because of its delapidated condition,"
The Bailey House and the adjoining seminary kitchen-dining room
are fine examples of early missionary structures, combining both
New England and Hawaiian architectural- influences. The buildings,
in reasonably good repair, are operated as a museum by the Maui Historical Society. Several rooms are furnished with items fron the
missionary period. The structures are significant reminders of the
efforts of the missionaries not merely to convert and educate the
Hawaiians but also to change their culture, morals, and habits. They
are evidence of the spirit which caused one minister to say during
the 1840's, "Let an Hawaiian female be only modest and industrious, and
she will make a neat and prudent wife." But other groups of structures appear to illustrate better the entire range of missionary
activity and influence,
12. Lahainaluna Technical High School (Lahainaluna, Mission
Seminary at Lahainaluna}T On the hillside about 1-3/^ miles northeast
of Lahaina, on the Island of Maui; the campus proper covers about 10
acres, but the school property amounts to about 1,000 acres; historic
structure in fair condition; owned by the State of Hawaii and administered as a boarding school by the Department of Education,
The year 1831 was one of discouragement for the American missionaries in Hawaii. After a decade of effort, native school attendance
had suddenly dropped, and it was feared that failure was at hand unless the Hawaiians themselves could be enlisted as teachers. Without
such assistance, it was thought that one of the great missionary
goals — to teach the Hawaiians to become "thinking people" — could
not be realized. Thus in 1831 it was decided to establish a seminary
for training teachers. Lahaina was chosen as the site, and the project
was made possible when Governor Hoapili's wife, Hoapili-Wahine, donated
1,000 acres of land at a place called Lahainaluna, meaning "upper
Lahaina,"
With the Rev. Lorrin Andrews in charge, the school opened in a
series of grass houses on September 5, 1831. There were then 25
pupils, all mature native men. Tuition was free, but the pupils
raised their 01m food and performed the work of the school. A
pupil in the first class was David Malo, then 38 years old. He
later became a noted historian and was responsible for the preservation of much lmowledge of ancient Hawaii, He is buried on the hill,
Puu Pau Pau, above the school. By June, 1832, a stone schoolhouse
was completed.
Finding that school books were needed, Andrews imported an old and
battered Ramage press during 1833* From that press on February 14,183^,
182
Bailey House (right) and Wailuku Female Seminary (left). Wailuku. Maui. Conricsy Hawaii Visitor! Bureau
Hale Pa'i, or Printing House. Lahainaiuna. Maui, where the "first American newspaper printed west of the Rockies" came off the
press in 1834. r , „ ,•• . D
r
 Courtesy Hawaii \ isitors Bureau
came the first copy of the first American newspaper printed "west of
the Rockies" -- the Lama Hawaii, or Hawaiian Luminary* The stone
building which housed this press, the "Hale Pai," is the only one
of the early school structures which still stands.
During the next ten years the school came under the direction of
the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, and both
student body and curriculum were expanded. Geography, writing, and
arithmetic were taught, as well as teacher training and technical subjects such as carpentry, masonry, engraving, and agriculture. Before
many years the institution was "standardized" as a boarding school
for Hawaiian boys below the age of 20. By I8U3 the seminary had three
main buildings --a church, a press, and a school -- three adobe
teachers' residences, and two rows of adobe and grass houses for students.
Under the direction of Andrews, who was working on a Hawaiian
dictionary, and Sheldon Dibble, a stimulating teacher who developed
an interest in Hawaiian antiquities and history, Lahainaluna became a
"spring-head" of Hawaiian culture. A group of native scholars was
developed. One result was the important Ka Moplelo Hawaii, a history
of the islands written and printed in Hawaiian by the pupils.
Dibble's own history of Hawaii was printed at the school in 18^3. Toward the end of that decade a visitor noted that Lahainaluna graduates
were "doing something towards maldng books and forming a national literature." But the influence of the school was more than literary*
It produced many successful teachers, lawyers, judges, surveyors,
ministers, and other professional men who did much to improve the lot
of the native Hawaiians, Some of the graduates were instrumental in
framing the more liberal lavs and constitutions which after 1839
helped transform the kingdom into a realm ruled by law. Two graduates
in particular, Kauhane and Filipo, became famous orators who long
worked for better government.
In 18^9-1850 the school was turned over to the Hawaiian government,
and it so continued until annexat inn to the United States. It then became
a private boarding school for a time but in 1916 was placed under a
board of Maui County officials. In 1923 it passed to the direct control of the Hawaiian Department of Public Instruction, and has continued to the present as a public technical high school.
The influence of Lahainaluna extended beyond the islands. As
an industrial school organized before similar technical training was
generally available in the United States, it inspired General Samuel
Chapman Armstrong to found the Hampton Institute in Virginia for
Negroes and American Indians during 1868,
The present campus, with its numerous modern buildings and landscaped grounds, preserves little of the appearance of the early seminary.
Only one building, the Printing House, remains from the missionary
183
period; and the old cemetery, containing the grave of the Rev, Sheldon
Dibble, is in poor condition, though fenced. Nevertheless the school,
as the first seminary for teacher training in the islands, as the site
of the printing of the first American newspaper in the Pacific, as the
scene of labor during the preparation of the first Hawaiian history,
and for many other contributions to Hawaiian spiritual and material
development, richly merits recognition. However, the same broad
themes seem to be even more significantly symbolized by the mission
structures in Honolulu.
D" Island of Molokai
13, Kalawao Peninsula (Kalaupapa, Hansen's Disease Settlement).
A small, flat peninsula jutting into the ocean from approximately the
center of Molokai's northern coast and separated from the rest of the
island by spectacular 2,000-foot cliffs; the peninsula and the adjoining region set apart as a leper settlement have an area of about 10 square
miles; still employed as a leprosarium and contains two well-preserved
early churches; owned by the State of Hawaii and administered by the
Department of Health, Communicable Disease Division, Hansen's Disease
Branch, Honolulu; access by permit only.
What appears to have been leprosy was reported by missionaries
in Hawaii as early as 1823; but in 1863 Dr. W. Hillebrand, of Queen's
Hospital, described it as a new disease in the islands, called attention
to its rapid spread, and recommended that some "humane measure" be taken
to isolate those affected. Kamehameha V interested himself in the problem,
and as a result the "Act to Prevent the Spread of Leprosy" was approved
on January 3, I865. It authorized the establishment of an isolation
settlement; and upon the advice of the Rev. Dvight Baldwin, a missionaryphysician and member of the Board of Health, the peninsula at Kalawao,
on Mblokai, was selected for the purpose. The central government
acquired title to all privately owned lands In the new reservation,
and the area's inhabitants were removed to other properties received
in exchange. The first patients arrived on January 6, 1866. By 1872
about 600 lepers had been sent to Kalawao. Often severe heartbreak
occurred when the infected natives, who usually did not realize the
dangerous nature of their ailment, were separated from their homes
and families. During the early years conditions at the settlement, which
later was known as Kalaupapa after the town which became its center,
were severe.
The .leper colony was the scene of heroic sacrifices made by a number
of superintendents, missionaries, doctors, priests, and other religious
and lay workers of several denominations. The best known of these heroes
was the Roman Catholic priest, Father Damien de Veuster, the "l^rtyr of
Jfolokai," who in 1873 began his work of administering to the spiritual
and physical needs of the colonists and who continued his service until
his own death from the disease in 1889- la recent years Hansen's disease
has been almost wiped out in Hawaii, and there is now but a small group
of patients living at Kalaupapa. The historic churches, Siloama, a
Protestant chapel built in I87I; and St. Philomena, the Catholic church
started as a frame chapel in 1872 and enlarged as a masonry structure
during Father Damien's time, are well-preserved and serve as a reminder
of the heroism once displayed at the settlement.
184
lh. Sandalwood Pit (Sandalwood Boat, Lua Moku Iliahi). On the
backbone ridge of the Island of Molokai, in the Kamiloloa Sand Division,
3.3 miles east of the Molokai Forest Camp; about 2 acres; marked by
a sign but otherwise uncared for, remarkably intact considering its
age and lack of restoration; owned by the State of Hawaii and administered by the Forestry Division.
This grass-covered, hull-shaped depression in the ground, about
150 feet long, hO feet wide, and 12 feet deep, is a relic of the
sandalwood trade, the first major commercial enterprise developed in
the Hawaiian Islands after their discovery by Cook. For about two
decades, from 1812 to the early iS^O's, this industry was the mainstay of the Hawaiian economy, and the intensity with which it was
carried on, to the neglect of normal food raising and gathering, is
credited with contributing to the rapid decline in the native population.
Foreigners discovered sandalwood trees on the Hawaiian Islands
about 1790, but despite the high prices brought by the wood in China,
where it was much in demand for incense, idols, carvings, and other
products, the trade did not really get started until 1812. A boom
followed, bringing large revenues to the king and chiefs who owned
the forests. So greedy were the rulers for foreign articles that thousands of commoners were sent to the mountains to cut, stack, and haul the
sandalwood. The rapid exhaustion of the groves brought an end to the
trade during the 1830's.
One aspect of the trade was the digging of pits, the size of
ship hulls, in the mountains for ascertaining when a shipload of
wood had been gathered. One theory holds that when a pit had been
filled, the chief who owned it would bargain with ship captains for
sale of the contents; and after the price had been established the
commoners would carry the logs to the shore on their backs. Other
sources point out that Hawaiian kings often bought foreign ships, paying for them with an equal volume, or in some cases twice an equal
volume or more, in logs. To measure the price of a ship, pits were
dug the size of the hull and filled with sandalwood. Still other
writers believe the pits were used by the chiefs to prevent being
cheated by the ship captains. At any rate, several pits are reported
to survive on the islands, particularly in the hills of Molokai.
The one described is in an attractive, if somewhat remote, location
and is reached by a good dirt road*
E. Island of Oahu
15. Aliiolani Hale (Judiciary Building). At the corner of King
and Molilani Streets, opposite Iolani Palace, in downtown Honolulu;
about two acres; exterior is in good condition but interior is now
(1962) undergoing alteration; owned by State of Hawaii and used as
a State office and court building.
185
bandalwood 1 it high m the hills ot Molokai. N. P. S. Photograph. 1962
Aliiolani Hale, or Judiciary Building, Honolulu, completed in 1874 and used as the office and legislative building of the Royal
Hawaiian Governnient. „ _ _ _. , . ,„,
V 1'. s. Photograph, llbi
This large and ornate stone structure is, after the Iolani Palace,
perhaps the most impressive relic of the Hawaiian monarchy. The erection
of "New Government Offices1' was authorized in I87O, but there was some
difficulty in obtaining a suitable plan. Finally, a design prepared
by architects in Sydney, Australia, for a new royal palace was revised in Honolulu for the new office building. Its style defies architectural description but is generally said to "appear Italian." The
cornerstone was laid on February 19, I872, and upon completion two
years later it was named Aliiolani Hale ("House of the Chief of Heaven")
by Kalakaua and became the office building of the royal Hawaiian
Government and the meeting place of the legislature. Hawaii's first
public library was housed there as was the natural history museum
of the Natural History and Microscopical Society, an organization
sponsored by King Kalakaua.
Early in 1893 the proposal by Queen Liliuokalani to change the
constitution aroused a storm of protest, chiefly among the foreign
residents; and on January 17, 1893, & Committee of Safety took possession
of the government office building. That same afternoon a proclamation
ending the monarchy was read from the steps of the structure. The
Provisional Government which replaced the monarchy established its
seat of government in the Aliiolani Hale, but the executive and legislative
offices were soon moved to Iolani Palace, where they have since remained.
The Aliiiolani Hale became the judiciary building, and it has housed
the Territorial and State Supreme and Circuit Courts to the present day.
The First Circuit Court meets in the old legislative chamber.
The best-known feature of the Aliiolani Hale is the statue of
Kamehameha I which stands in front of the building on King Street.
The funds for the statue were appropriated by the Legislature of
1878 to commemorate the discovery of Hawaii by Cook 100 years earlier.
The statue was made by T. R. Gould, an American sculptor living in
Italy. The ship bringing the statue to Honolulu was wrecked on the
Falkland Islands, and a replica was finally unveiled by King Kalakaua
in I883. The original statue was later recovered and today stands
in Kohala on the Island of Hawaii.
As the scene of the most important events of the Revolution of
1893 and as the first seat of the Provisional Government, the structure
is of considerable historical importance. The same general story is also
commemorated by the Iolani Palace, which appears to possess greater
significance in the overall history of Hawaii.
186
AMERICAN PROTESTANT MISSION SCHOOL HOUSE (OLD MISSION SCHOOL HOUSE).
880 MLssion Lanej at its junction with Kawaiahao Street, opposite
the Mission Houses in downtown Honolulu; on Kawaiahao Church grounds;
excellent condition; at present (April, 1962) is unused; owned by
Kawaiahao Church.
This attractive, one-story building, about 33 by 60 feet in size,
with thick adobe walls, Was built by 16*35 &8 a schoolhouse by the
missionaries. It is sometimes described as the "first permanent
school" in the islands, which may be true if it is considered as a
continuation of the school established in Honolulu by Mrs. Hiram Bingham in 1820. A number of the annual General Meetings of the Hawaiian
Mission were held in this building. Restored in 1922, it was long under
lease to the Free Kindergarten and Children's Aid Association.
Another renovation was carried out in 19^8.
Even though importantly associated with the missionary program of
education which has so greatly influenced the history of the islands,
this structure in itself might not merit national recognition because
the entire missionary effort is more importantly represented by other
sites. However, it definitely is part of the complex of mission
structures formed by the Mission Houses and Kawaiahao Church and is
worthy of being considered with those sites for national recognition-
(See photograph following p. 138.)
17. Hanaiakamalama (Queen Emma's Summer Home). 2913 Nuuanu
Avenue, in Nuuanu Valley, about 2 1/2 miles northeast of downtown
Honolulu; about 9*30^ acres; excellent condition; owned by the State
of Hawaii, but by law the larger landscaped park is under the control
187
of the City and County of Honolulu, and the house and iimnediate
grounds are administered by the Daughters of Hawaii as a house
museum.
This distinguished but simple one-story white frame home evidently
was built about 16^+9. The next year it was bought from "a Mr. Lewis"
by John Young II, Premier under Kamehameha III and son of John Young,
the English adviser of Kamohameha I. Young gave the house its present
name, meaning "Foster child of the God Kamalama," and willed it to his
niece, Emma. Born in 1836, this granddaughter of John Young was adopted
as a child by Dr. T. C. B, Rooke, an English physician, and married
Alexander Liholiho (Kamehameha IV) in 1856. Their only child, the
Prince of Hawaii, died a tragic death at the age of four, and the
king died in 1863. The king and queen used the Nuuanu home as an
occasional retreat from the formalities of court life, and after I863
Dowager Queen Emma continued to use it at intervals, and turned it over
to an Episcopal school as a summer vacation home. A notable incident
was a banquet and beJJ. given for the visiting Duke of Edinburgh in 1869,
an event which led to the construction of the present rear room. After
the death of the queen in 1885, the property passed into private hands
but was acquired by the Territory in 191^»
Although the house has much sentimental value for its association
with one of the most respected and beloved of Hawaii's queens, its major
significance probably is architectural, since it is a typical example
of the homes which caused visitors to call mid-19th century Honolulu
"an outpost of New England." The structure is now superbly furnished,
many of the articles having been used by Queen Emma and her family.
Here also are displayed many portraits and articles associated with
the monarchy. Of outstanding interest, and of value as indicating
one phase of foreign activity in Hawaii, is the 6ilver baptismal font
donated to the infant Prince of Hawaii by Queen Victoria. This
structure, educational as it is in illustrating the growing formality
and elegance of Hawaiian court life during the middle period of the
monarchy, is eclipsed by the formidable Iolani Palace.
1^' Nuuanu Pali. On the crest of the Koolau Range at the head
of Nuuanu Valley, about 6 miles northeast of downtown Honolulu; reached
by the old Nuuanu Pali Road; about 500 acres; in a relatively undisturbed natural condition except where scarred by roads; owned by the
State of Hawaii and administered by the Forestry Division.
At the head of the Nuuanu Valley the eastern slope of the Koolau
Range is a series of spectacular cliffs about 1200 feet high; and flanking the gap are cliffs ranging up to about 3000 feet in height. The
cliffs at the pass were the scene of the closing phase of the Battle
of Nuuanu Valley which took place during the spring or summer of 1795 •
After winning complete control of the Island of Hawaii in 1791/ Kamehameha had delayed his long campaign to unite all of the islands under
his rule until he recruited his strength and until his chief opponent
on Maui and Oahu, Kalanikupule, had weakened himself by civil wars.
188
llanaiakamalama, Queen Emma's Summer Home in Nuuanu Valley. Honululu. Courtesy Hawaii Visitors Bureau
Nuuanu Pali, at the head of Nuuanu Valley. Oahu ; where Oahu warriors were driven to their deaths by Kamehaniehn's victorious
army . Courtesy Hawnii Visitors Bureau
Sensing that the time was ripe early in 1795, he landed a large force
from canoes at Waikiki. The Oahu forces took their position in Nuuanu
Valley and made a fierce resistance. Kamehameha's artillery, manned
by foreigners, probably turned the day, and the Oahu forces finally
broke. Many of the fleeing warriors were pushed over the pali (cliff)
and fell to their deaths on the rocks below.
This victory gave Kamebameha control over all the islands except
Kauai and Niihau; and the year 1795
 i s generally considered to mark his
ascension to the throne of all Hawaii. However, it was 1810 before
the king of Kauai and Niihau finally acknowledged Kamehameha's authority.
Except for one campaign on Hawaii, this was the last battle fought by
the great king. The victory undoubtedly marked a major step in the
development of the Hawaiian kingdom, but the altered state and indefinite
area of the entire Nuuanu battlefield seem to make the site less tangible
for commenorative purposes than other places associated with events
which appear equally important in Kamebameha's rise to power.
19. Our Lady of Peace Cathedral. Between Fort and Bishop Streets,
seaward from Beretania Street, in downtown Honolulu; about 2 acres; good
condition; an active church; owned by the Roman Catholic Church, Diocese
of Honolulu.
The first Catholic missionaries in the Hawaiian Islands arrived at
Honolulu from France on July 7, I827. Despite an unenthusiastic welcome
from many of the chiefs and the Protestant missionaries, they obtained
from the king a grant of land in Honolulu during August, and in January,
1828, a chapel was opened on this property. The priests were expelled
from the islands in I83I, and a period of persecution of Catholic converts followed; but after much dispute religious toleration was forced
on the Hawaiian king by the French in 1839• As a result, Bishop Rouchouze came to the islands from South America . in May, iQhO, bringing
with him three priests, to join a priest already in the islands. From
that time forward Catholic missionary work went ahead rapidly in Hawaii.
Very soon after Bishop Rouchouze's arrival, the missionaries
determined to erect a stone church in Honolulu, and on June 22, 1840,
a contract was made with F. J. Greenway for a coral block structure,
115 by 50 feet, to cost $14,150. The location chosen was the land
occupied by the mission of 1828; the cornerstone was laid July 9, 1840.
The building was completed and dedicated on August 15, 1843. It was
later decided to change the style from its original simple lines to
"Gothic," and a concrete "porch" was added in 1910; but this is as
far as the change of styles progressed. The original belfry was
replaced by a concrete tower in 1917; and in 1926 the woodwork was replaced. Father Damien de Veuster, "the Martyr of Molokai," was ordained
here in 1864.
As the oldest surviving, and principal, Catholic church structure
in the islands, the Cathedral commemorates one important phase of
missionary and educational effort among the Hawaiians, Although the
Catholic Church was highly successful in winning native converts, its
efforts, from a national point of view, were not as significant in bringing the islands into the orbit of the United States as were those of the
American Board missionaries.
I89
20. Thomas Square. Bounded by South King, Ward, South Beretania,
and Victoria Streets, in downtown Honolulu; one square block; a welllandscaped, tree-shaded city park; owned and administered by the City
and County of Honolulu.
During the later l830's and early l840's the Hawaiian kingdom was
continuously vexed and disturbed by the growing influence of foreigners
and by the interference of representatives of foreign governments in
its affairs. During lQk2 it sent commissions to Great Britain, France,
and the United States in an attempt to gain recognition of its independence. Although the British government had no designs at that particular
time to annex the islands, a number of British residents in Hawaii
feared the growth of American influence and hoped that claims of British
subjects could be used to force the kingdom into the British empire. In
response to complaints from such residents, Lord George Paulet, in H.M.S.
Carysfort, arrived at Honolulu during February, 18^3, and made such
stringent demands upon the government that Kamehameha III provisionally
ceded the islands to Great Britain. Paulet raised the British flag and
occupied the kingdom for five months, showing every intention of annexing Hawaii permanently. The United States, watchful of its own interests
in the islands, protested the move; and it seemed that an international
incident was about to explode.
As this juncture Rear Admiral Richard Thomas, commander of the
British Pacific Squadron, arrived and renounced Paulet1s action, declaring his intention of restoring Hawaiian independence. As a colorful public ceremony on the morning of July 31, lcV+3, amidst the parading
of troops and firing of salutes, Admiral Thomas had the British flag
lowered and restored the kingdom to its native ruler. A wave of public
rejoicing swept over the realm, and the site of the restoration ceremony
was later named Thomas Square.
This park is thus associated with one of the most dramatic events
illustrating a dominant theme of Hawaiian history--the struggle of the
Eawaiians to maintain their independence in the face of growing foreign
interest in their homeland., The same broad topic seems to be illustrated
even more forcefully, however, lay the Russian fort at Wainea, Kauai.
190
Our Lady of Peace Cathedral, Honolulu ; dedicated in 1843. N. P. S. Photograph. 1962
SITES ALSO NOTED
A. Island of Hawaii
1* Bond House, on Bond Road, J mile southeast of Kapaau, North Kohala
District, Island of Hawaii. The Rev. Ellas Bond, the well-known "Father
Bond of Kohala," arrived in the Hawaiian Islands in l8Ul, fresh from
theological seminary. Assigned to the mission station at Iole land
division, Kohala, Bond and his wife moved into a small one-story timber
house on a stone foundation started the year before by their predecessor,
the Rev. Isaac Bliss. This house, much added to, was to shelter the
Bonds the rest of their long lives. Bond established a "Select Boys'
Boarding School" in adjoining structures in 18^2 which continued until
merged with a government school in 1878. Mrs. Bond opened a Kohala
Seminary for girls early in 18^2. "Necessity compelled its suspension,"
but the dream resulted in the opening of the nearby Kohala Girls' School
in 187U. In 1852 the Hawaiian Mission agreed to sell the house to Bond
for $500, so that he could "stand as an independent pastor of an independent church." Bond founded the Kohala Plantation to provide work for the
natives, and he established a number of churches and schools in the Kohala
region. Most of all, perhaps, he is remembered as a friend of the Hawaiian people. He died in 1896.
2. David Douglas Memorial, North Hilo District, Island of Hawaii, Near
this spot the great British botanist, David Douglas, was killed in a wild
bullock pit, July 12, iQ^k* Douglas was the botanical discoverer of
the Douglas fir and the sugar pine.
3« Hookena, a coastal town about 3i miles south of Honaunau, South
Kona District, Island of Hawaii. Here, during the spring of I889, Robert
Louis Sevenson spent a week as a guest in the home of a Hawaiian,
D. H. Nahinu. "The only white folk in a Polynesian village," he lived,
as he later said, "as it was perfect to live," drinking "that warm, light
vin du pays of human affection." Here he received much of the inspiration
for and probably wrote part or all of his well-known story, "The Bottle
Imp." The sites of Nahinu's house and of the courthouse where Stevenson
watched a trial are still identifiable. The old Puka-ana Church, built
during the l840's, still stands but is in a ruinous condition as a result
of the 1951 earthquake.
k. John Young Homesite, at Kawaihae, South Kohala District, Island of
Hawaii. The ruins of what may have been the residence of Kamehameha I's
influential English advisor are still visible. The identification of
this site is not positive.
5. Kaawaloa, a now virtually deserted coastal village on the north
shore of Kealakekua Bay, South Kona District, Island of Hawaii. In the
early 19th century this settlement was a place of major importance in
Hawaiian history. The Cook Monument marking the place where the famous
explorer was killed is here, and the ruins of the heiau where his body
191
reportedly was burned and broken up are still visible. Here was organized the revolt against the abolition of the tonus, and here was a major
center of early Christian missionary effort. The famous chiefess,
Kapiolani, who defied Pele, lived here for a while. About 1828-1829
Queen Regent Kaahumanu had the bones of the famous chiefs kept at
Waipio and Honaunau removed to caves in the cliffs near the village.
Some of the remains were later moved to Honolulu. The site contains
interesting ruins hut is accessible only by boat or trail.
6. Kalahlklola Church (The Great Stone Church at Kohala),on Bond Road,
about # mile southeast of Kapaau, North Kohala District, Island of Hawaii.
A Protestant mission station was founded in the Kohala District in 1837
by the Rev. Isaac Bliss and Mr. Edward Bailey, the first location being
at Nunulu. The church there blew down, however, and in 1839 the station
was moved three miles seaward to the Iole land division, east of Kapaau.
When the Rev. Elias Bond arrived to take over the station in l84l, the
church at the new location was already
 ,fvery rotten, leaky, .... a
wallowing place for hogs during the week." Bond, who served as pastor
at Kohala for 43 years, hoped to start a new stone church.during December,
l84l, but he had to be content with thatched churches for many more
years. Late in 1849, however, a storm destroyed the large frame and
thatch church, and the congregation at once determined to rebuild in
stone, vowing not to "beg aid of any kind from any one." Epidemics,
storms, and other trials made the gathering of the materials a slow
process, and it was not until May, 1853, that Bond was able to announce
that the walls were nearly up. Rocks, coral for lime, and timbers had
to be carried for miles to the building site. The church was finally
completed in 1855, at which time Bond said that no church in the islands,
except Kawaiahao, could compare with it. King Kamehameha IV came to
Kohala to dedicate the church, but Bond refused to let the ruler, a
secular person, speak until after the religious dedication, a decision
which so enraged the king that he did not appear. "Very good," said
Bond, "but the King is not God." Much of the lumber came from Boston,
the gift of friendly ministers who gave lectures to raise the funds to
buy it. Bond served as pastor of the church until the end of 1884.
7. Kamehameha Water Tunnel, Kohala, Island of Hawaii. This tunnel,
said to have been built at the order of Kamehameha the Great to water
his taro patches, illustrated the agricultural, irrigation, and public
works projects inaugurated by the first ruler of all the islands. It
is still in use.
8, Kamehameha Ill's Birthplace (Lokomaikai), at Keauhou, North Kona
Di stri ct, Island of Hawaii. Here Kauikeaouli, son of Kamehameha I and
Kepuolani, was born on March 17, l8l4. In 1825 he ascended to the
Hawaiian throne, assuming the name of Kamehameha III. His reign, the
longest in Hawaiian history, was marked by major advances in constitutional government and in social, educational, and cultural development.
The site is marked by a plaque and owned by the Daughters of Hawaii.
192
9. Lyman House Memorial Idiseum, 276 Haili Street, in Eilo, Island
of Hawaii. Erected in about 10*37-1839 by the Rev. and Mrs. David
Belden Lyman, this two-and-a-half-story stone and frame house
reflects in its architecture the New England origin of its builders.
The house, in splendid condition and open to the public as a museum,
is one of several early mission houses which have survived.
10. Mark Twain Tree, in Waiohinu, Kau District, Island of Hawaii.
Apparently there is no proof that, as stated by tradition, Mark
Twain planted this tree during his visit in 1866. The original
tree was destroyed by a storm, but It has sprouted again from the
original roots.
11. Mokuohai Battlefield (Ke'ei Battlefield, Site of Battle of
Mokuohai), on the coastal plain between Napoopoo and Honaunau, South
Kona District, Island of Hawaii. Upon the death of King Kalaniopuu
of the Island of Hawaii in 17^2, his kingdom went to his son,
Kiwalao. When the new ruler announced how he had divided his
lands among the chiefs, the leading chiefs of Kona, headed by
Kamehameha, were dissatisfied. A fight developed between the forces
of Kamehameha and those of the king, the decisive battle, known as
the Battle of Mokuohai, being fought in the Ke'ei land division
south of Napoopoo. Kiwalao was killed, and Kamehameha was victorious. As a result, the island was divided into three kingdoms,
one of which was headed by Kamehameha. It is said in Hawaiian
tradition that Kamehameha knew that this victory "was but the beginning of an empire." Although the site marks an important step
in Kamehameha'a conquest of all the islands, its indefinite extent
and the multiplicity of other sites which also and perhaps more
dramatically illustrate the same story seem to disqualify it for
national recognition.
12. Napoopoo Church, at Napoopoo, South Kona District, Island of
Hawaii. This large stone church was built during the logo's under
the supervision of the Revs. Cochran Forbes and Mark Ives.
1 3* Odd Sugar Mil , at Waiohinu, Kau District, Island of Hawaii.
ik. Puako Church, in the Lalamilo land district, South Kohala
District, Island of Hawaii. Though in poor condition, this stone
church is still impressive.
15. Punaluu, a coastal settlement in the Kau District, Island of
Hawaii. A memorial shrine here marks the traditional boyhood home
of Henry Opukahaia, the Hawaiian youth who became a Christian convert in New England and was largely responsible for inspiring the
establishment of the Protestant missions in the Hawaiian Islands.
16. St. Michael's Catholic Church, on Alii Drive, opposite Waiaka
Lodge, in Kailua, Island of Hawaii. During June, 18U0, Father
193
Robert A. Walsh and Louis-Marie Ernest Heurtel, priests of the
Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary, arrived in
Kailua from Honolulu and, made welcome by Governor Kuakini, established the Mission of St. Michael on July 5, 1840. This was the
first Catholic mission established in the islands other than on
Oahu. The construction of the present stone church was started
by Father Marechal in 1846. It was completed in two years but not
dedicated until I855.
17. Thurston House, in the Honuaula land district, near Kailua,
North Kona District, Island of Hawaii. The ruins of this once welt
known structure, for years the home of the family of Asa Thurston,
pioneer missionary at Kailua, may still be seen.
18. Wahaula Heiau, close to the ocean shore in the Kalapana extension section of Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, on the Island
of Hawaii. This ancient temple has close associations with Hawaiian tradition and history. Thought to have been built in or
before the 13th century, it was reconstructed about 1500 and again
in the time of King Kalaniopuu (shortly before 1782). It was
known as a temple of "severe" services, where many human sacrifices were required. It continued to operate for a time after
the official abolition of the ancient religion in I819 and has been
termed "perhaps the last heiau in which worship was publicly offered to the Hawaiian gods."
Despite its remarkably fine condition and impressive appearance,
it .seems less significant as illustrating the destruction of the
old gods than several other sites.
B, Island of Kauai
19. Church of Koloa (Koloa White Church, Koloa Church), on Poipu Road,
Koloa, Island of Kauai. This church, originally Congregational, was
built in 1859 and was long known as the "White Church" because of its
color. Although its architecture always showed a strong New England
influence, the present refinement of detail stems from a restoration
of 1929.
20. Prince Kuhio's Birthplace, on the coast south of Koloa, Island
of Kauai. This park of about five acres, containing remains of
a fishpond, house platforms, and other structures of an early Hawaiian chiefly residence, serves as a memorial to one of the principal recent defenders and heroes of the native Hawaiian people.
Jonah Kuhio Kalanianaole was born here, the son of the high chief
of Kauai, on March 26, 1871. Of high rank, he was taken into the
royal household and later was made a prince by Queen Liliuokalani.
He demonstrated his loyalty to the monarchy by participating in the
unsuccessful rebellion against the Republic of Hawaii in 1895.
In 1902 he was elected territorial delegate to Congress and served
until his death on January 7> 1922. In Washington and in Honolulu
194
he fought to obtain greater recognition for the Hawaiian people,
particularly by his attempts to gain for them a larger share of
the public land through homesteading provisions.
21. Russian Fort near Hanalei, on top of the bluff at the northeast point of Hanalei Bay, Island of Kauai. A low, brush-covered
earth wall is all that remains of the fort built with the help of
the natives by Dr. Georg Anton Scheffer, representative of the
Russian American Company, in I816-1817. Seemingly this action
was a preliminary one to building the more elaborate stone fort
at Waimea (q.v.). The Russians were expelled from Kauai during
the late summer of 1817, and the full extent of their ambitions
in Hawaii remains in doubt. The ruin stands in the pastures
of Princeville Ranch, "the oldest ranch on Kauai," founded by
Robert C. Wyllie, a Scotsman who served as Hawaiian minister of
foreign relations from 1845 until his death in 1865. The ranch
was named Princeville Plantation in honor of the two-year-old
Prince Albert, who visited the property in 186*0 with his parents,
King Kamehameha IV and Queen Emma.
22. St. Raphaelrs Church (Mission of St, Raphael the Archangel,
Kauai~Catholic Mission), about one, mile southeast of Koloa, Island
of Kauai.
This attractive and impressive group of structures on spacious
grounds preserves to a remarkable degree the appearance and feeling of an early Catholic mission establishment in the islands.
It was founded on December 25, 1841, by Father Arsenius Robert
Walsh, the "Apostle of Hawaii," who on that same day celebrated
the first known Mass on Kauai. A Catholic school, founded two
days earlier, was soon given government support, an important
step in obtaining broader toleration for the Catholics. During
October, l842, Father Walsh bought 17 acres of land on the Maulill
flats near Koloa and that same year started construction of a stone
chapel, the ruins of which still stand. The present large rubble
and mortar "Roman" style church probably was started about 1843
and was consecrated October 24, 1856. The large adobe rectory was
begun in 1856. Both church and rectory have been altered but preserve much of their original architectural style.
23. Wailua Coconut Grove, around and at the rear of Coco Palms Hotel,
on north side of Wailua River near its mouth, Island of Kauai. Site
of an ancestral home of Kauai royalty, said to have last been used
by Queen Deborah Kapule, who lived there from about 1830 to 1850.
The grove, according to some reports, is old; but other evidence
points to a planting about the opening of the 20th century.
- 24, Waimea Church (Waimea Stone Church, Waimea Foreign Church), on
Tsuchiya Road directly west of Waimea High School, in Waimea, Island
of Kauai. The history of Waimea Foreign Church, "the last of the
great stone churches" to be built in Hawaii, began in May, 1820,
195
with the arrival of two Protestant missionary families at Waimea.
The Rev. George Rowell in 18^7 decided to replace earlier church
structures with a new stone building. By then the native population of Waimea had hegun to decline, and it required "prodigious
labor" for a "full decade after the time when it was thought that
such marvels could be wrought" to compJ.ete the handsome structure
by 1858.
C. Island of Maui
25. Huialoha Church, at Kaupo, Island of Maui. This stone church,
erected in 1859, is particularly impressive because of the lonely
grandeur of its location.
26. Iao Valley (Battle of Kepaniwai Site), about 2f miles west
of the Wailuku Post Office, Island of Maui. A marker directly
in front of the Iao Hotel in this spectacular gorge indicates
the main field of the Battle of Kepaniwai ("the damming of the
waters") fought in the spring of 1790 between the invading forces
of King Kamehameha from Hawaii and the defending Maui force
commanded by Kalanikupule, son of the king of Maui and Oahu. Kamehameha won a complete victory, so many of the defenders being
slaughtered that, according to Hawaiian tradition, the valley's
stream was filled with bodies. The conquest was not permanent,
however, since Kamehameha soon was called back to Hawaii by civil
war on that island. He conquered Maui again, and finally, in
1795- The battlefield, stretching roughly from the hotel downstream to just beyond Kepaniwai Park (county-owned), is so highly
developed that much of its historical impact is lost.
27'• Kaahumanu Church, in Wailuku, Island of Maui. This stone
church, built in or about I837, is typical of the early Protestant
churches on the Hawaiian Islands.
28. Kaahumanu's Birthplace, a cave in the south point of Hana
Bay, Island of Maui. Here, in or about 1768, "was born Kaahumanu,
favorite wife of Kamehameha I; kuhina nui (roughly, prime minister),
1819-1832; queen regent, 1825-1B32:
29. Keanae Congregational Church, Keanae, on the northeast coast
of the Island of Maui. This old stone church, set in a coconut
grove, is still in use.
30. Makena,. a village on the west coast of the eastern part of the
Island of Maui, between Keawakapu and La Perouse Bay. This ancient
settlement was an old landing used to ship Kula district vegetables
to California during the gold rush; and it was also, until recently,
a shipping port for cattle raised on the ranches of Haleakala. Keawalai Church (Makena Church) is an old limestone-block, plastered
structure at the south end of the village. It is still in use,
196
31. Olovalu. Landing, on the west coast of Maui, ahout 6 miles southeast of lahaina, Maui. Off shore at this place occurred the "Olowalu
massacre" of 1790, when Captain Simon Metcalfe, of the ship Eleanora,
vengefully fired his guns, loaded with grapeshot and nails, into
the canoes of the villagers who had come to trade. It is said that
more than 100 natives were killed in this retaliation for the stea>
ing of the ship's boat and the killing of its seaman occupant.
32. Wananalua Church, in Hana, on the Island of Maui. This Congregational church was organized on July 29, 183^, by the Rev.
Daniel Toll Conde^and the Rev. Mark Ives, the first missionaries
to reach Hana. The construction of the present church started in
18^3, stones from two nearby heiaus being used for the walls. The
building probably was completed about 18^9-1851, and it was extensively altered in 1897.
D. Island of Molokai
33. Kaluaaha Congregational Church (Kalawina Church), at Kaluaaha
on the south shore of the Island of Molokai. This fine old church,
built of coral blocks, was established, evidently in 1832, by the
Rev. Harvey Rexford Hitchcock, the first missionary to be stationed
on Molokai. Available data concerning the date of construction
are conflicting, but I833 is the date most frequently given. If
this information is correct, this "mother church" of Molokai would
be one of the oldest, if not the oldest, surviving church structure
in the islands. The building was dedicated December 6, 1835.
The Rev. Mr. Hitchcock is buried on the grounds. The building was
extensively repaired, and the buttresses were added, in 1920.
3^* Kamehameha Vr s Coconut Grove (Kapuaiwa Grove), on the south
shore of the Island of Molokai, about 1.2 miles west of Kaunakakai.
This impressive grove of about 1,000 coconut trees is supposed to
have been planted by order of King Kamehameha V in the early l860's.
Molokai was Kamehameha V's favorite island, and he had a home on
the beach at nearby Kaunakakai.
35. Pakuhiwa Battleground (Kawela Battlefield), on the south shore
of the Island of Molokai, about 5.1 miles east of Kaunakakai. On
this open field late in the l8th century Kamehameha I is said to
have fought his "most destructive battle," The engagement occurred
when Kamehameha, the king of Hawaii, brought a force to help
Molokai repel an invasion from Oahu. "Canoes are said to have
been drawn up for four miles along the shore so that the battle
could be fought to a finish." The invaders were defeated. A
burial mound marking the grave of the warriors killed during the
battle can still be seen.
197
E. Island of Oahu
36. Court House (Old Parliament House), on Queen Street near Bishop,
in downtown Honolulu. This building, said to have been erected in
I851, was the Court House of the Hawaiian Kingdom, and here the
Parliament met prior to the completion of the Aliiolani Hale. Here
Prince William C. Lunalilo was elected king on January 8, 1873) and
Colonel David Kalakaua was elected to the same office on February
12, 1874. After the latter election supporters of the defeated
candidate, Queen Dowager Emma, rioted through the Court House,
attacking legislators and destroying much property. Order was restored by sailors and marines landed from United States and British
warships. The building is now owned by American Factors, Ltd., and
is used for office purposes.
37. Diamond Head (Leahi), in Honolulu, Oahu. This extinct crater,
probably the best-known natural landmark in the Hawaiian Islands,
figured somewhat prominently in Hawaiian history, but it wa6 not
importantly associated with events of outstanding significance.
It is said that in pre-European times, criminals were hurled to
their deaths from its summit. At its western foot stood Papaenaena
Heiau, a highly sacred temple used for royal ceremonies. Near it,
in 1783, eight heroic Oahu warriors assaulted a large invading
force from Maui, killing many of the enemy before being forced to
retreat. There are a number of recorded instances of human sacrifice, particularly of war victims, on this heiau. King Kahekili
of Maui and King Kamehameha I of Hawaii, upon their separate conquests of Oahu, sacrificed their principal opponents here. The
temple was totally demolished about 1856.
The peak received its present name during the 19th century when
sailors mistook volcanic crystals found there for diamonds. In
January, 1895, Hawaiian royalists in rebellion against the Republic
of Hawaii took refuge for several days on the peak after being driven
from Waikiki and before being scattered or captured. The landmark
was later acquired by the United States Army, became a part of
Fort Ruger, and is now partly used for National Guard purposes and
partly as a State park.
38. First Artesian Well; the site is at Honouliuli, Ewa District,
Island of Oahu. Drilled in 1879, this well, the first artesian
well in the islands, opened a new source of water which was important in the expansion of the sugar industry. It was drilled by
James Ashley for James Campbell.
39* Iolani Barracks, 450 South Hotel Street (opposite the Library
of Hawaii) in downtown Honolulu. This stone structure with crenelated towers was designed by Theodore Heuck and built about 1870-
1871 as housing for the Household Troops, who in 1873 numbered
about 60 men and constituted the entire Hawaiian standing army.
During September, l873> these soldiers mutineed at the barracks and
were disbanded by King Lunalilo. The event had political overtones and damaged the prestige of the government. The barracks
198
also figured in the revolutions and counterrevolutions which
marked the overthrow of the monarchy and the period of the Republic, and housed activities of the citizens guard and national
guard. The building now serves as a State office building but
has been declared structurally unsound.
kO. Kamehameha IIIfs Summer Palace (Kaniakapupu), on water reserve lands in upper Nuuanu Valley, Island of Oahu. Only the
ruins of the walls remain of this structure, completed in l8t5,
which was the scene of many festive occasions.
hi. Kualoa Sugar Mill,•near Kualoa Point on the east shore of the
Island of Oahu. This impressive ruin is all that remains of the
mill built by S. G. Wilder during the l860's.
1*2. Punahou School, l601 Punahou Street, about two miles east of
the central section of Honolulu. The land and spring at this site
were originally given to the missionary, the Rev. Hiram Bingham,
by Hawaiian chiefs in 1829. Not wishing to send their children
to school with the "lewd" natives and distressed at the need to
ship them to New England for schooling, the missionaries determined
to found their own school for their children. The institution,
partly a boarding school, was established in l8Ul and opened on
July 11, 1CV42, under the Rev. Daniel Dole; and it grew steadily.
Instruction was in English, and it is said that a. number of Californians found it more convenient to send their offspring to
Punahou than to eastern institutions. In 1853 ^n e school was
granted a royal charter as "Punahou School and Oahu College," but
it remained essentially a preparatory institution. The next year
the school became an independent corporation, and other children
than those associated with missionary families were admitted.
Over the years Punahou School has become the traditional school
where the children of the dominant faction in Hawaii receive their
elementary and high school training, and as such it has had a
peculiarly important place in island life and politics. The Old
School Hall, erected in 1851-1852 is still in use,
^3* Robert Louis Stevenson's Grass House, in Manoa Valley, Honolulu. During a six-month visit to Hawaii in 1889, Robert Louis
Stevenson lived for a substantial part of the time at Waikiki, near
Ainahau, the estate of A. S. Cleghorn. Sevenson became acquainted
with Cleghorn's daughter, the young Princess Kaiulani, and occasionally talked to the child under a banyan tree on the estate.
Many years later a grass shack on the estate was donated to the
Salvation Army Home, and it has been displayed as "Stevenson1 s Grass
House." Stevenson never lived in it, and there seems to be no
positive evidence that he ever did any writing in this structure,
which is largely a reconstruction.
hk. Royal Mausoleum, on Nuuanu Avenue above Judd Street, in Nuuanu
Valley, Honolulu. Construction of this stone mausoleum was started
during the reign of Kamehameha IV to provide a suitable resting place
for the bodies of members of the Kamehameha dynasty. Kamehameha I
199
is not buried here, since his body was hidden in a secret place
upon his death in 1819, and its whereabouts are still unknown. The
new tomb was still unfinished in 1863 when Kamehameha IV died and was
burled there. Later the remains of the other Hawaiian monarchs who
reigned between 1819 and l8p"4 were removed from the crypt on the
grounds of lolani Palace and interred in the new mausoleum. Kamehameha V was buried there in 1872, but his successor, Lunalilo,
preferred to he buried on the grounds of Kawaiahao Church. Following the extinction of the Kamehameha line, the rulers of the Kalakaua dynasty, King Kalakaua and Queen Liliuokalani, were interred
in the mausoleum. The bodies have all been removed from the original stone mausoleum, which is now a royal chapel, and are placed
in crypts on the grounds. Several prominent personages associated
with the monarchy, such as John Young, R. C. Wyllie, and Charles
R. Bishop, are also buried on the property.
45. St. Andrew1s Cathedral, on Beretania Street at Emma Square
in downtown Honolulu. The cornerstone of this Episcopal church
was laid in I867.
46. Washington Place, at Beretenia and Miller Streets in downtown Honolulu. This large white colonial home is the official
residence of the Governor of Hawaii and has important associations
with the Hawaiian royal family. It was designed and built during
the period 1842 to 1846 for Captain John Dominis, a trader prominent in Pacific commerce, by Isaac Adams, a "good mechanic."
Dominis desappeared at sea soon after completion of the house, and
in 1847 his widow rented part of the structure to Anthony Ten Eyck,
American Commissioner to the islands. The house thus became the
"United States Legation" and was named "Washington Place" by Ten
Eyck in honor of George Washington, In 1862 Dominie's son, John
Owen Dominis, married a high chiefess, Lydia K. P. Kapaakea, who
later, as Princess Liliuokalani, became heir to the Hawaiian throne.
The couple.lived at Washington Place until liluokalani became
queen in 1891. After the overthrow of the monarchy in I893, she
returned to Washington Place and lived there until her death in
1917' la 1921 the property was acquired by the Territory of Hawaii
as an official residence for its governors. The design of the
building is one more reflection of the important New England
influence in the islands.
200
APPENDIX I
CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF SITES
The National Park Service has adopted the following
criteria for selection of sites of exceptional value.
1. Structures or sites in which the broad cultural,
political, economic, military, or social history of the Nation
is best exemplified, and from which the visitor may grasp the
larger patterns of our American heritage* Such sites are naturally the pointB or bases from which the broad aspects of prehistoric and historic American life can best be presented*
2. Structures or sites associated importantly with the
lives of outstanding historic personages*
3. Structures or sites associated with important events
which are symbolic of some great idea or ideal of the American
people.
*t-* Structures which embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type-specimen, exceptionally valuable
for a study of a period style or method of construction; or a
notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect whose
individual genius reflected his age.
5» Archeological sites which have produced information
of major scientific importance by revealing new cultures, or
by shedding light upon periods of occupation over large areas
of the United States, Such sites are those which have affected
theories, concepts, and ideas to a major degree*
6. All historical and archeological sites and structures
in order to meet the standards of exceptional importance should
have integrity; that is, there should not be doubts as to whether
it is the original site or building, original material or workmanship, and original location* Intangible elements of feeling
and association, although difficult to describe, may also be
factors in weighing the integrity of a site or structure*
T» Structures or sites of recent historical importance
relating to events or persons within 50 years, will not, as a
rule be eligible for consideration.
201
GPO 96501 5 